
In reading this book it is  important to  remember the following  facts. 
1.  The  book  was  written  in  prison   immediately  after  a  twenty-
nine-day hunger strike   under particularly difficult conditions.  It was 
written in the midst of the constant noise  of cells being opened and 
closed  by  an  iron  hand  and  of  guards  and  prisoners  shouting  back 
and forth   and within  the  framework of an  absurd  discipline  (called 
prison rules),  invented and applied for  the purpose of brutalizing the 
inmates as  much as  possible. 
The  section in which  Charles  Gagnon  and  I  are still held as  these 
lines are written is  reserved chiefly for  the  mentally ill  drug addicts  
men  accused  of  homocide  and  facing  possible  life  imprisonment  
prisoners  in  depressive  states  and   lastly    political   madmen   like 
Charles  and  me   whom  the  officers  regard  more  or  less  as   de-
ranged   . 
Very often one or another of our jail mates slits his veins out of de-
spair   or simply to attract attention.  For one of the chief characteris-
tics of prison life is  the boundless solitude each of us  feels   especially 
during those hours of depression when it becomes impossible to com-
municate with others. 
In  addition  to  this  profound  and  unnamable  suffering  that consti-
tutes our daily human environment   I  must particularly mention the 
howling  stupidity  of the  radio  and  television  during   lock-out   and 
 rest period  the fact  that we are forbidden  to go  outdoors to get a 
breath  of fresh  air  and  an  occasional  look  at  the  sun   and  the  thou-
sand petty annoyances that are deliberately imposed on our most ele-
mentary activities:  eating  pissing  sleeping (in the cells in our section 
9 
10  Pierre  Vallieres 
the lights are never turned out),  receiving mail   doing laundry   shav-
ing   etc. 
In short   this  book  was  written  in  a  universe  of cunningly  organ-
ized  dehumanization  .  .  .  which  drives  more  than  one  prisoner  to 
suicide-or murder   if he is  set free  again. 
 .  This book  is first  of all a  political act.  It is  necessarily biased.  It 
contains  not so  much  answers  as  questions   and facts   that I  want  to 
set before men-in particular the men of Quebec-who are capable 
of consciousness   social  responsibility   and revolutionary action. 
It is  the political act of one  member of the Front de liberation du 
Quebec  (FLQ),  of  a  militant  who  is  still  young   who  has  not  had  a 
long experience of revolutionary struggle  and who has  no  monopoly 
on truth. 
This  book   moreover   was  not  written with the intent of  shaking 
revolutionary  thought  and  action  to  their  foundations   but  of per-
forming  an  act  whose  meaning  is  given  by  the  book  itself   which 
comes from  my  guts  as  much as  from  my  head. 
3.  In this  essay   which  is  no  doubt badly put together   and which 
I  shall  probably not have  the leisure  to revise  before it is  sent to the 
printer  (unless  my  extradition  to  Canada  or  deportation  to  another 
country  is  postponed  to  the  spring  or  summer  of  1967),  the  reader 
will find  many faults   repetitions  and awkward constructions  side by 
side with limpid passages where the words  flow  For driven by the 
constant  threat  of  deportation  or  extradition  that  has  hung  over 
Charles Gagnon and me ever since we were arrested in New York on 
September 28   1966  I have had to scribble down in haste my memo-
ries  impressions  ideas  my short but brutal experience of life and my 
boundless conviction that it is possible to build a better world now   if 
we all agree to roll up our sleeves and set to work. The world is wait-
ing to be transformed. 
All  this  necessarily makes  for  a  book  that is  unfinished   imperfect  
and  full  of  words  which   in  this  age  of   relativity   may  have  dif-
ferent  meanings for  the author and the reader according to the cam-
era that each focuses on them (his vision of the world). I have tried to 
write  simply   with  everyday  words   but I  have  not always  been suc-
cessful;  and  in  certain  parts  (Chapter  6  in  particular)  you  may  find 
 indigestible  passages.  Furthermore  certain categories   such  as  the 
words   objective  and  subjective  may  now be out of date.  I have 
Foreword  11 
sometimes  used  them  as  convenient tools  for  making what I  have  to 
say  more  understandable  to  men  who  are  not  primarily  concerned 
with  language. 
It is  also  possible that I have given certain words a meaning that is 
rather personal or a content that is  difficult to grasp for  anyone igno-
rant of certain historical facts  or systems of thought   thus contradict-
ing my  first  intent   which was  to write  a book that would be easy  to 
 digest   (But  sometimes  the  precise  expression  of what one  means  
thinks  or wants to make understood does not lend itself to simplifica-
tion    although-another contradiction!-in places I have doubt-
less  succumbed  to  the temptation to  simplify.) 
For  that  matter   you  will  surely  find  more  than  one  contradiction 
in this book.  At least   that is  my impression. The  literary  and auto-
biographical  pages  will  probably  seem  clearer  to  you-perhaps  be-
cause of the acid in them-than the pages devoted to a partial defini-
tion  of   our  ideal   of an egalitarian  social  structure.  Certain  of  my 
analyses  may  be  disconcerting  to  some  readers   just  as  certain  posi-
tions that I take will no doubt be shocking to more than one discrimi-
nating  mind. 
But  I  think  that  the  unity  of  the  book  and  its   meaning   (in  the 
phenomenological sense of the word   in  the  sense  of  truth  or rela-
tive   essence  -relative both  to  the experiences   feelings   and ideas 
of the author and to those of the reader) lie precisely in this complex-
ity  of  the  writing   which  is  only  a  very  awkward  expression  of  the 
complexity  of  human  behavior   individual  and  social   personal  and 
collective.  An  expression   furthermore   peculiar  to  one  man   re-
stricted  to  a  given  number of experiences and  acts   formulated by a 
mind which is   when all is said and done  limited  and conditioned by 
a milieu-Quebec-which has just leaped from  the Middle Ages into 
the twentieth century. 
I believe  that the unity and meaning of any activity lie  in its com-
plexity  and  that  they  cannot  exist   develop   and  become  complete 
outside the contradictions inherent  in  reality  as  we  perceive it   real-
ity as  we  live  it   reality  as  we  transform  it  according to  the present  
changing state of our knowledge  and means of action   reality as  to  a 
great  extent we also  undergo it   under the influence  of the forces  of 
nature  whose   secrets  we do  not yet possess  and which we are  not 
yet able  to control for  purposes  really  our own. 
12  Pierre  Vallieres 
Contemporary  scientists  are  convinced  that  the  physical  and 
human  universe  (can  one  really  separate  physical from  human?)  of 
which  we are a part and which   in  each generation   is  at a given but 
not fixed  state of development  of evolution   is   essentially infinite  
I do not know what meaning they give to the word  essentially  But 
in any  event  if they are  right   as  I  believe   in  affirming that the uni-
verse  is  at  once  infinite  and  relative-which  is  fundamentally  the 
same  thing-and if   as  they likewise  affirm   our knowledge of reality 
can  only  be  partial  and  must  constantly  be  re-examined;  if   finally  
our  action  can  only  be  biased   that  means  that  our  activities-
whether in  the domain of thought   of scientific  research   or of politi-
cal engagement-will always ·contain contradictions. 
In other words  every new affirmation calls forth a new set of ques-
tions.  Every  scientific  discovery  gives  rise  to  hypotheses  that  were 
hitherto unknown. Every political action calls forth a reaction ("reac-
tion  being understood here as an effort to prevent man from becom-
ing  so  identified  with  his  creation  or  his  revolution  that  he  remains 
fixed  at that point and becomes fossilized). 
But  none  of  this   as  I  say  somewhere  in  this   rough  draft   pre-
vents  men-us from  using  practical   constantly  modified  affirma-
tions  and  negations  of the contradictions around  us  to  make history  
to  evolve   ever  more  conscious  and  free   by means  of  revolutions  
4.  This book contains a considerable number of footnotes   some of 
which  are  of  respectable  length.  These  footnotes  should  be  read  in 
their  place   that  is   at  the  end  of  the  sentence   expression   or para-
graph  where  they  are indicated by the  usual  numbers. 
With a few changes  some of these footnotes could have been inte-
grated  into the  text   if I  had had the  time and  means to do three or 
four drafts. But under present conditions I am obliged to turn over to 
the  reader  a  rough  draft  expanded  here  and  there  by  explanatory 
notes. 
5.  I am  neither a scholar nor an accredited philosopher.  I am  only 
a proletarian who has  had the good fortune  to  read a great deal (but 
without  method   since  there was  no  money to buy method at a uni-
versity)  and  who  has  also  had  the  opportunity  to  act   who  is  acting 
and wants to go  on  acting.  For whom  it is  enough  to  be honest with 
himself and to try  as best he can  to put his convictions into practice. 
6.  This  autobiographical  essay  is  a  conscious  witness  and  a  con-
Foreword  13 
scious  appeal that I  have made freely  and for  the same reason that I 
have made my political choice  my choice of the revolution:  the con-
viction that the relations between men must be radically transformed 
and that imperialism  must be definitively overthrown if-in this age 
when  biologists   biochemists   physicists   astronomers   and  so  on  are 
on  the verge of discovering the  mysteries  of matter both living and 
inert   conscious  and  unconscious   and therefore  the  secrets  of life 
and  death-if  I  say   we  do  not  want humanity   on  the  threshold of 
tremendous progress  to become  in spite of itself  the victim of a uni-
versal nuclear catastrophe which would turn it back to the stone age. 
We  must wrest the vast resources  and gigantic  possibilities  of this 
century  (which  are  due  in  large  part to  contemporary technological 
discoveries)  from  the grasp  of the businessmen-the businessmen of 
state  capitalism  as  well  as  the  businessmen  of  private-corporation 
capitalism-by practical   revolutionary   and collective action. 
Today  as in the time of Lenin  this action  which began as far back 
as  the  eighteenth  century  with  the  first  rebellions  of  the  English 
workers  and  the  organization  of  the  Chartist  movement   must  ad-
vance to new stages. It must do so  not only in Quebec but in  the en-
tire world.  For it must be recognized that with the present expansion 
of  communications  and  of  population  movements   etc.,  which  is 
based on the international organization of the market  of competition 
and  class  struggle   our  true  country  is  increasingly  becoming  the 
world.  This   far  from  destroying nationalities and the individual   ac-
tually  provides an  opportunity   if we  succeed in  overcoming certain 
individual and collective fixations on outmoded  categories  of com-
ing into  our own   perhaps  for  the  first  time  in  history. 
7.  The  author  of  this  book  is  a  Quebecois   a  French  Canadian   a 
proletarian   a  colonized  man  and  a  baptized  son  of  the  Church. 
Hence   an  extremely  frustrated  individual  for  whom   freedom   is 
not a metaphysical  question  but a  very concrete problem. 
My  consciousness and activity (what I sometimes call my  responsi-
bility)  are bound up with my  frustrations and my  need to free  myself 
from  them completely   once and for  all. 
I believe that my experience of life has much in common with that 
of  many  individuals   both  in  Quebec  and  in  other  countries   in  my 
own  class and even in  the upper classes   which  are better off   richer 
economically  and intellectually. 
14  Pierre  Vallieres 
That is  why I  spontaneously chose to write an essay that would be 
at one and the same time an autobiography and an attempt to reflect 
upon  and  sum  up acts  which  have  already been performed and oth-
ers yet to be performed  acts which  concern you just as  much as  me. 
8.  I  have  no  diplomas  or  medals.  The one  thing  I  take  pride in  is 
something I  owe to the American police   who arrested  me  at the re-
quest of the Canadian police.  By so  doing   they in a way forced  me-
and my  friend  and  comrade  Charles  Gagnon-to bear  witness  pub-
licly  to  the determination   not only  of a  little  nucleus  of individuals 
but  of  the  immense  class  of  the  oppressed  (peasants   workers   stu-
dents   young  people   intellectuals   white-collar  workers   and  even 
scientists and researchers harnessed to the interests of big capital), to 
free  their  human  activities  definitively  from  the  dictatorship  of the 
 sharks of high  finance  
The  increasing  number  of letters  that  Charles  and  I  receive  offer 
us  daily  proof that we  will  not have borne witness  in  vain. 
9.  I  take  advantage  of this  foreword  to  give  infinite  thanks  to  all 
those  (students   workers   journalists   militants  in  unions  and popular 
movements   housewives   friends  known  and  unknown)  without 
whom  this  work would  have  rotted in  the many garbage cans of the 
Manhattan  House  of  Detention  for  Men  into  which   often  enough  
we  throw  the whole  plate of dogfood  they serve  us  at mealtime. 
To  me   as  to  Charles  Gagnon   the disinterested  devotion  and  un-
calculating support  of all  these friends  is  material proof of the exist-
ence of human solidarity.  Solidarity which  will  be the cement of the 
new classless  society   as  money is  the  cement of the  present  society 
based on  the exploitation of man  by  man. 
There  is  already a  growing number of  people for  whom  solidarity 
has  replaced  money  as  the   reason  for  living   as  the  principal 
 value  in  life. 
That is  why I have chosen-that is  why we have chosen-to work 
for  the  revolution. 
As  in  the physical  universe   so  perhaps in  the revolution  there are 
neither  straight lines  nor  curves.  One  can  act  in  many  ways   just  as 
there are many ways  of seeking and discovering the  secrets  of the 
universe.  But  there  are  constant  relations  among  these  many  dif-
ferent  ways of acting on the world and on society.  And  I have an in-
creasingly clear impression that through these relations  which at first 
Foreword  15 
glance  are difficult  to  grasp  and comprehend because they  are com-
plex  and integrated with  a universe  that is  perpetually changing   we 
are  approaching a  unity  unprecedented  in  known  human  history   a 
unity which will not be monolithic or subject to the hegemony of any 
one group.  A unity which we will make concrete only through a long 
revolutionary  struggle   collective  and  multinational   conducted  by 
the majority of the men  who people this  planet:  the  peasants   work-
ers   white-collar  workers   students   young  people   progressive  intel-
lectuals   and researchers. 
It is  this unity of conscious  responsible men  bound together in sol-
idarity   that will  create  the  new  society humanity needs  in  order to 
progress. Yes  to progress  for this unity is not an end but a beginning  
the first  act of a new world  of a human history that will at last be de-
termined  by the majority  of men. 
10.  Finally   this  book   as  is  clearly  indicated  in  the  introduction 
which  follows  this  long  foreword  (!),  was  conceived  first  of  all  in 
terms  of  the  practical  tasks  which  today  confront  the  workers   stu-
dents   and young revolutionaries  of Quebec. 
Nevertheless   perhaps  it  may  also  have  something  to  say  to  the 
men and revolutionaries of other countries  colonized or even imperi-
alist. 
Manhattan  House  of Detention for  Men 
New  York   fall-winter  1966-1967 
-Pierre VaUieres 
1 
The W hite Niggers 
of America 
To be a   nigger  in America is  to be not a man but someone s slave. 
For the  rich white  man of Yankee  America   the nigger  is  a  sub-man. 
Even the poor whites consider the nigger their inferior. They say:   to 
work as  hard as  a  nigger    to smell like  a  nigger    as dangerous  as 
a nigger    as ignorant as  a nigger  Very often they do not even sus-
pect that they too  are  niggers   slaves    white niggers   White racism 
hides  the  reality  from  them  by  giving  them  the  opportunity  to  de-
spise  an  inferior   to  crush him  mentally or to  pity him.  But the poor 
whites  who  despise  the  black  man  are  doubly  niggers   for  they  are 
victims of one more form  of alienation-racism-which far  from lib-
erating  them   imprisons  them  in  a  net  of  hate  or  paralyzes  them  in 
fear  of one day having to  confront the black man  in  a  civil war. 
In  Quebec the French Canadians are  not subject to  this  irrational 
racism that has done so  much wrong to the workers  white and black  
of the  United States.  They can take no  credit for  that   since  in Que-
bec there is  no   black problem  The liberation struggle launched by 
the American blacks nevertheless arouses growing interest among the 
French-Canadian  population   for  the  workers  of Quebec  are  aware 
of  their  condition  as  niggers   exploited  men   second-class  citizens. 
Have  they not been   ever since  the establishment  of  New  France  in 
the  seventeenth  century   the  servants  of  the  imperialists   the  white 
niggers  of  America?  Were  they  not  imported   like  the  American 
blacks   to  serve  as  cheap  labor  in  the  New  World?  The  only  dif-
ference  between  them  is  the  color  of  their  skin  and  the  continent 
they  came  from.  After  three  centuries  their  condition  remains  the 
same.  They still constitute a reservoir of cheap labor whom the capi-
21 
22  Pierre  Vallieres 
talists  are  completely  free  to  put  to  work  or  reduce  to  unemploy-
ment   as  it  suits  their  financial  interests   whom  they  are  completely 
free  to  underpay   mistreat  and  trample  underfoot   whom  they  are 
completely free   according to law   to  have  clubbed down by the po-
lice and locked up by the judges  in the public interest  when their 
profits  seem  to  be  in  danger. 
1 
Our  ancestors  came  here  with  the  hope  of  beginning  a  new  life. 
They  were  for  the  most  part  soldiers  or  day  laborers.  The  soldiers 
came   a long time after Champlain  to fight  the English   and they re-
mained  in  New  France because  they  did  not have  the  money  to  re-
turn  to  the  metropolitan  country.  They  became  traders   artisans   or 
coureurs de bois in order to subsist. The others came as   volunteers  
especially  under  the  Talon  administration   about  a  century  before 
the  English  conquest.  They  were  unskilled  laborers  who  could  find 
no  work in Colbert s France and no  reason for living.  They belonged 
to  the  growing  number  of  idle  men  and  vagabonds  who  filled  the 
towns  of  mercantile  France.  In  Talon s  mind   these   volunteers  
were  to  be added  to  the  unemployed  to  serve  as  a  permanent  local 
source  of  labor.  Married  by  force   as  soon  as  they  arrived  in  New 
France   to  orphan  girls  imported  from  Paris   the   volunteers   were 
given  the  task  of  laying  the  foundations  of  an  independent  society. 
They  were  to  work  at  building  an  indigenous  industry  and  devel-
oping agriculture  and they were to have as many children as possible 
in order to rapidly expand the labor force  and the market. Those who 
refused  to obey the directives of the intendant were put in prison or 
sent back to France. Many colonists preferred to become coureurs de 
bois  rather  than  be  forced  to  marry  a  woman  whom  they  did  not 
know  and often did  not want because she  was  ill-tempered   homely  
or  stupid. 
The  colonists   or  Habitants  as  they  later  came  to  be  called   were 
thus placed at the service  of the ambitious projects of Colbert s pro-
tege.  But  these  men   who  were  sent  from  France  by  the  hundreds  
had learned no trade in  the metropolitan country. They possessed no 
technical knowledge and had nothing to offer Talon but their muscle  
good  will   and  taste  for  adventure.  In  the  mother  country  they  be-
longed  to  that mass  of unemployed  workers  whom  the development 
The  White Niggers  of America  23 
of  manufacturing   the  concentration  of  capital  in  the  towns   and 
overpopulation had driven out of the rural areas and reduced to idle-
ness  and vagrancy.  In  the towns  of France  they constituted that  in-
creasingly  large  and  threatening  class  of  pariahs  who  could  find  no 
other way to  survive  than to turn to highway robbery.  The king had 
outlawed brigands and vagabonds  but the only result of the law was 
to send a considerable number of innocent men to prison or to death  
because  the  state   whose  revenues  were  devoted  to  financing  inces-
sant wars and the splendor of the court  was unable to provide work 
for  the growing number of the starving.  The ruling classes had three 
ways  of getting rid  of this  cumbersome burden:  the army   prison   or 
the  colonies.  Tens  of  thousands  of  these   paupers"-as  the  aristo-
crats called them-were therefore sent to  the battlefields of Europe  
America   Asia   and the  Middle East.  Tens of thousands more  died in 
prison   had  their  throats  cut   were  hanged  or  decapitated.  The rest 
were  abandoned to  their fate  or exported like  cattle to  the colonies  
where  they were  to  serve  as  labor or cannon fodder.  When the pris-
ons  of  the  metropolitan  country  were  filled  to  overflowing  and  the 
people  were  growing  a little  too  restless   the  hotheads   were often 
exiled  to  the colonies instead of being hanged:  it was  more humane. 
Periodically  the  strongest  prisoners  were   freed   to  be  turned  into 
mercenaries or  colonists  The same policy was applied by the Eng-
lish ruling classes   especially with regard to the Irish and Scotch bas-
tards  (English  dixit).  Furthermore   France  and  England  were  then 
engaged  in  an  unrestricted  and  lucrative  trade  in  black  slaves.  The 
pirates  (the  gangsters  of  those  days)  made  fortunes  by  assisting  the 
ruling classes of Europe in their work of  civilizing  and  evangeliz-
ing"! 
Talon had little success in endowing the colony with an independ-
ent  economy.  He  lacked  not  only  qualified  labor  but  capital.  The 
French merchants were not in the least interested in sacrificing their 
monopoly in order to develop an independent economy which would 
sooner  or  later  be  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  the  metropolitan 
country-that is   which  would  increasingly  restrict  their freedom  of 
trade and their profits.  For these merchants  colonization in the sense 
in which Talon understood it did not deserve to be encouraged.  New 
France  was  to  remain  a  trading post   a  source  of raw  materials and 
profits  for  France.  The  theocracy  Bishop  Laval  was  trying  to  estab-
24  Pierre  Vallieres 
lish   Talon s industries   and  the  rapid increase in  the  number of im-
migrants  irritated them.  The money  swallowed up  in  colonization 
and evangelization brought no returns to France. And all the  volun-
teers   who  were taking root in New France appeared to  them as  so 
many  potential  rivals  and  enemies.  Decidedly   this  Talon  had  be-
come their chief enemy.  They demanded that the king recall him  to 
France.  Which was done in  1672. 
No  intendant dared pursue Talon s work.  The  volunteers  desti-
tute  disappointed  prisoners of their poverty  resigned themselves to 
clearing an ungrateful soil  on the seigneuries granted by the king  of 
France;  they  had  to  become  hunters   fishermen   and  woodsmen  in 
order  to  feed  their  numerous  children.  In  1689  there  were  10 000 
French Canadians in  New  France.
1 
The fur trade was monopolized by a few  French merchants-"the 
French  of France   as  they  were  already  beginning  to  be  called  by 
the Habitants  who hated them. All the profits went back to the met-
ropolitan  country.  The little  money  (many  times  devalued)  that  re-
mained in the colony was concentrated in the hands of a  minority of 
speculators. The people lived in the most extreme poverty  under the 
amused eyes of the            Bigots of the administration.  Sometimes 
the Habitants were called to  the colors  to defend the American pos-
sessions  of the  king  of  France   while  their  women  cleared  the land 
and  tended to the sowing and harvesting   raising  their broods at the 
same  time.  At  times   alone  or  in  groups   these  women  even  had  to 
arm  themselves  with  rifles  to  confront  the  Iroquois  guerrillas   while 
far away their husbands were fighting the English in the name of the 
king. 
With  each  war  reinforcements  arrived  from  France.  And  after 
each  treaty   the  penniless  demobilized  soldiers  stayed  to  swell  the 
ranks  of the  Habitants   marrying  their  daughters  and  perpetuating 
their  rough  existence.  Only  a  few  officers  had  the  signal  honor  of 
being admitted to the society of the nobles. 
Soon the seigneuries were overpopulated. Abandoned by the seig-
neurs  who were more interested in speculation and trade than in ag-
riculture   the land deteriorated and  the  misery  of the  Habitants be-
came  unendurable.  A  great  many  of  them  abandoned  their  fields  
cursing God for having led them to this country of forests   rocks   and 
The  White Niggers  of America  25 
water where  man wore himself out in vain trying to build a life con-
sistent with his  dreams of freedom   happiness   and peace.
  
The  towns  of  the  colony   like  those  of  the  metropolitan  country  
overflowed  with  idle   hungry  men.  A  few  years  before  the  English 
conquest   the  hunger riots   broke out nearly everywhere;  Bigot re-
plied  with  an  edict  ordering  all  the  unemployed  to  return  to  their 
land.   Take  your  hunger  off  our  hands   Bigot  said  to  them.   We 
don t  know  what  to  do  with  it.  Instead  of  idling  away  your  time  in 
the  towns  and  stinking up the place  with  your poverty   go  cultivate 
the land  work harder. There is no work for you here. But all the land 
belongs  to you.  Go  where you  please   But the  Habitants  could  not 
work miracles and change rocks into arable land.  Besides  all the land 
did  not  belong  to  them   as  Bigot  claimed.  The  best  land  had  long 
been reserved for  the handful of merchants and nobles  who had ob-
tained  control  of  the  wheat  trade.
3 
The  riots  broke  out  again  worse 
than  ever   and  even  under  the  intendancy  of  the  saintly  Hocquart  
the Habitants became more  and more  of a  threat. 
The  last  war  between  England  and  France   which  was  to  give 
New  France  to  the  English   made  it  possible  for  the  ruling  class  to 
enroll  the rioters in the French king s army.  Many  Habitants died in 
combat   and  once  the  war  was  over   the  people   exhausted   again 
withdrew  to  the seigneuries. 
The English merchants took over from the French merchants who  
before surrendering the colony to the English  had had time to effect 
some  profitable  sales  of  arms.  The  conquerors  had  no  difficulty  in 
gaining  the  collaboration  of the clergy and those  impoverished seig-
neurs  who  had remained in  the colony  despite  the  defeat.  Together 
they  divided  up  the  power:  the  English  monopolized  economic 
affairs  and the executive power   the clergy continued to control edu-
cation and collect the tithe  the seigneurs retained ownership of their 
land  and  obtained  the  right  to  hold  certain  administrative  posts. 
Nothing changed in the frugal  and monotonous life of the Habitants. 
They  were  still  beasts  of burden   despised  in  a hostile  country.  But  
God be praised   the clergy received the order from  Heaven to  make 
this  resigned  and  silent  collectivity  into  a  nation  dedicated  to  the 
Church. At last the life of slavery would take on meaning by becom-
ing  redemption.  This  people   planted  in  America  by  an  accident  of 
26  Pierre  Vallieres 
history   suddenly found  itself invested  with  a  supernatural vocation. 
Its task   in the pagan world of the savages and the English   would be 
to save  souls  by patiently bearing poverty   hard labor   and  isolation. 
The clergy organized the embryonic nation into parishes   created el-
ementary schools and colleges  arrogated to itself the right to regulate 
the lives  of individuals  and  groups   and  defined  the  ideology  which 
was  to  fashion  a  vision  of the  world  consistent  with  the  interests  of 
the  Church.  The  higher  clergy  became  the  true  ruling  class   while 
every  day  the  self-complacent  nobility  sank  a  little  further  into 
decay. 
The  population  continued  to  increase  at  a  very  rapid  rate.  The 
land   which  was  already  inadequate  and  impoverished   became less 
productive and more overpopulated. The young people left the coun-
tryside  to  try their  luck  in town   where the number  of  unemployed 
was  constantly growing.  In the meantime   in its classical colleges the 
clergy  was  educating  an  indigenous  petty  bourgeoisie   composed 
mainly of lawyers   notaries   doctors   and journalists.  Toward the end 
of the eighteenth century  this petty bourgeoisie began to develop its 
own  class  consciousness  and   in the name of the  nation   set itself up 
in  opposition  to  the  clergy   the  decadent  aristocracy   and  the  Eng-
lish.  By establishing a Legislative Assembly for  Lower Canada (Que-
bec),  England  gave  the  petty bourgeoisie  a  forum  which  it  used  to 
the fullest  to identify its  class interests with  those of  the people  as 
a  whole.  After  a  few  years  of apprenticeship   the  French-Canadian 
politicians  entered  into  open  rebellion  against  the  masters  of  the 
economy  the English  and their allies   the higher clergy and the seig-
neurs.  The  Habitants   who  had  been  completely  dispossessed   were 
hypnotized  by  the  fiery  Patriots  and   despite  the  opposition  of  the 
higher  clergy   demonstrated  with  increasing  violence  their  will  to 
overthrow the ruling classes.  Papineau  more than any other man   in-
flamed  the imagination of the Habitants and became almost a god to 
them.  Nevertheless  some of the Habitants who were skeptical or dis-
couraged were already beginning to  set out for  exile   seeking a more 
hospitable land.  In  1820  there began  an  exodus  of French-Canadian 
families  to the  United  States.  This  exodus  was  to  last a  century. 
French-Canadian  Christendom  was  suddenly  transformed  into  a 
vast  insurrection   which  was  just  as  frightening  to  the  Church as  to 
the conquerors  of  1760.  The  French-Canadian population  of Lower 
The  White Niggers  of America  27 
Canada  had  reached  500 000  and  was  growing  rapidly.  For  many 
months  unrest  had been spreading across  the  country.
4 
In  1837 and 
1838  the  people  rose  up  without  asking  permission  from  their 
Leader.  The  Leader   Papineau   fled  with  his  chief associates  to  the 
United  States.  The  Habitants  had  to  confront  the  English  soldiers 
alone and practically unarmed. After having met the savage counter-
offensive  of  the  English  with  heroic  and  desperate  resistance   they 
were  crushed and  massacred. 
The Patriots  the petty bourgeois led by Papineau  had not wanted 
a popular revolution.  In  mobilizing the people they had only  sought 
to bring pressure on the English in order to obtain for  themselves  for 
their  class-and  not  for  the  Habitants-a  new  division  of  power 
which  would  bring  them  certain  additional  revenues  and  a  greater 
share  in  the  economic  advantages  of  the  system.  Thus   they  de-
manded control of the  trade in  wheat and domestic  consumer goods 
in  Lower Canada. They wanted to  participate in  the financial  activi-
ties  which had up to  that time been reserved  for  the English  and  to 
take  back  from  them  the  rights  which  they  declared  had  long  been 
their  due.  But  they did  not  want  to  overturn  the  system  or to  drive 
the  English  out.  They  demanded  nothing more  than a  redistribution 
of privileges  between  themselves  and  the  English.  They  wanted the 
victors  of  1760  to  recognize  them  as  the  ruling  class  and  to  admit 
them  as  equal  partners  within  the  same  political  institutions   the 
same economic system  and the same social organization. The discon-
tent of the Habitants had only been exploited as  a means of applying 
pressure.  The  people   taken  in  by  Papineau s  eloquence  and  driven 
to  desperation  by  their  economic  difficulties   had  let  themselves  be 
 had  
The  popular revolution took the Patriots by surprise. It upset their 
plans.  For  now  the  English  were  justified   from  a  capitalist  point of 
view   in  granting  no  concessions  to  the  French  Canadians.  Worse 
yet   the  English  still  had the support of the  clergy   who  everywhere 
began  to  preach  obedience  to  the  established  authority and  submis-
sion to the  just punishment  which had been brought upon the peo-
ple by  the Patriots   rationalism   atheism   and spirit of revolt! 
The  defeats  of  1837-1838   the  defection  of  Papineau   and  the 
many  sentences  of  excommunication  handed  down  by  the  upper 
clergy  struck  a  hard  blow  to  the  hopes  of  the  Habitants   who   like 
28  Pierre  Vallieres 
their  ancestors   took  refuge  in  bitterness  and  resignation  to   God s 
will   The  exodus  of  French  Canadians  to  the  United  States  in-
creased. 
For the petty bourgeoisie   once the English hysteria in response to 
the  rebellion  had passed   the defeat  was  quickly  turned  into  a  new 
compromise.  The  popular  rising  had  alarmed  those  of  the  English 
who  understood  what  was  happening.  They  decided  the  time  had 
come to integrate the petty bourgeoisie into their system of class col-
laboration  and  to  meet  some  of  the  Patriots   demands.  Lafontaine 
and  Baldwin  were  the instruments of this  compromise.  The J:rench-
Canadian  petty  bourgeoisie  renounced  Voltaire  the  way  Christians 
renounce  Satan   and all  his  works  and pomps   and became  recon-
ciled with the higher clergy.  Even Papineau made honorable amends 
before  being  officially  rehabilitated  and  becoming  the  seigneur  of 
Montebello  (a  fine  career as  a revolutionary!).  England granted Que-
bec and Ontario  responsible government  and a few years after the 
rebellion  the French-Canadian petty bourgeois  with few exceptions  
were  only  too  happy  to  be  paternally  invited  by London  to  play  at 
being  statesmen  and  to  become   English   But  affairs  remained 
under the exclusive  control of the  British. 
Since  1760 the British and their English-Canadian agents had mo-
nopolized the trade in furs and wheat and had been the sole benefici-
aries of the sale of English products on the Canadian market (Ontario 
and  Quebec),  as  well  as  of  the  export  of  Canadian  raw  materials 
(furs   lumber   wheat)  to  England   via  the  ports  of  Quebec.  These 
capitalists   anxious  to  preserve  the  social  peace  that  had  been  re-
gained   began to buy the services of a few  Quebecois lawyers and by 
giving  them  prestigious  posts   to  co-opt  them  into  their  companies 
and into  the political parties whose   machines   they had  controlled 
from  the beginning.  So  it was  that after the departure of Lafontaine  
Georges-Etienne Cartier became a dominant figure   both as  solicitor 
for  the Grand Trunk Railway   the most powerful financial  institution 
in  the  country  (controlled  by  British  interests),  and  as   national  
leader of the Tory party. The Grand Trunk used him as  chief propa-
gandist  for  the  projected  confederation   which  was  to  be  approved 
by London in  1867.
5 
The  petty  bourgeois  had  managed  to  come  out  all  right   but the 
working  class  of  Quebec  was  none  the  better  for  that.  The  clergy 
The  White Niggers  of America  29 
began to worry about the exodus of French Canadians to  the United 
States.  The  petty  bourgeoisie   which  often  controlled  trade  in  the 
countryside  was also growing nervous. If the rural areas continued to 
be  depopulated   to  be  drained  of  their youngest  and  most  dynamic 
elements   would  not  the  clergy  and  the  petty  bourgeoisie  lose  the 
base of their power and profits? Montreal was then a city more Eng-
lish  than  French   and  in  the  eyes  of the French-Canadian elite   the 
rural  milieu  represented  the  true  nation   the true  people.  But  if the 
people  refused  to  live  in  this  rural  milieu   would  not   the  nation  
(that  is   the  petty bourgeoisie  and  the  clergy)  sooner  or  later  disap-
pear? What would become of the Church and small  family  industry? 
It was then that the instinct of self-preservation inspired the clergy 
and the petty bourgeoisie with the ideology of a  return to the land  
and  the   colonization   of  the  vast  undeveloped  regions  of  Quebec. 
This  unexpected  find  was  welcomed  by the  English  Canadians  and 
by the  French-Canadian bourgeoisie  of the towns   who  saw  it as  the 
most  practical  and  economical  means  of  solving  the  problem  of 
urban  unemployment  created  by  the  rural  exodus.  Business  circles 
and  the  government  hastened  to  finance  the  colonization  projects  
and a whole literature began to circulate inviting the French Canadi-
ans  to  remember their   glorious  past   deliberately falsifying  history 
so  as  to  idealize  the  life  of the  Habitants under the  French  regime  
making  the  words   rural    Catholic   and   French   synonymous 
and preaching the crusade of a  return to the land  as  the sole solu-
tion  to  the grave  social  problems of the French-Canadian nation. 
Thousands  of unemployed  were despatched with  their families  to 
Saguenay-Lake  St.  John   to  the  Laurentians   to  Upper  St.  Maurice 
Valley   to  certain  remote  corners  of the  Eastern  Townships   to  the 
Portneuf  region   and  to  the  interior  of  the  Gaspe  peninsula.  Later  
colonization was  to extend to Abitibi and northern Ontario.  The col-
onists were given plots of land to clear without anyone s bothering to 
find  out  if  the  land  could  really  be cultivated.  Some  colonists  were 
lucky  enough to  be granted land of excellent quality.  But the major-
ity of these   pioneers   were  innocent victims  of the stupidest   most 
antisocial   most  inhuman enterprise conceivable. Only a clergy and a 
petty bourgeoisie  as  backward  as  ours  could  have  dreamed  up  and 
carried  out  such  a   reform   For  decade  after  decade   hundreds  of 
thousands of Quebecois   left to  themselves  were to wear themselves 
30  Pierre  Vallieres 
out  like  convicts  trying  to  convert  acres  of  rocks  into  productive  
profitable  farms.  The  miracle  never  took  place.  And  the  result  of 
colonization was even greater misery  than any  the French-Canadian 
workers had known  until then.  But listening to  the cures   preaching  
   we  could  console  ourselves  with  the  divine  thought  that  so  much 
suffering could not fail  to win us entrance into Heaven. Were we not 
on  earth  to  expiate  our sins  and  to   earn  a  place  in  paradise? This 
absurd philosophy  was  again  presented to  the people as  the essence 
of  the  most  perfect  happiness.  Does  the  history  of  mankind  offer 
other examples  of collective  masochism  as  tenacious  as  the  Catholic 
religion  of Quebec? 
While  the  French  Canadians  toiled  in  pain  and  anxiety  and  ex-
piated  sins  whose  exact  nature  they  did  not  know   the  businessmen 
of  Montreal  and  Toronto   with  the  advice  and  support  of the  busi-
nessmen  of  London   were  organizing  the  infrastructure  that  would 
enable  them  to  grow  rich.  The  compromises  which  Lafontaine  and 
Cartier had reached with the English  millionaires had left the Habi-
tants  totally  indifferent.  Since  the  insurrections  of  1837-1838   they 
had  only  contempt  for  professional  politicians.  The  politicians  did 
not dare  to  stir  up the  indifference  of  the  masses  by  submitting  the 
plan  for  confederation  to  the  popular  verdict.  The  Confederation 
was  established  the  way  a  law  is  passed  in  the  House   in  complete 
disregard  of public opinion. 
The  Confederation  of  1867  institutionalized  the  domination  of 
business  over  Canadian  economic   political   and  social  life  as  a 
whole   coast to coast  Today we know the real motives that guided 
the  Fathers  of  the  Confederation  and  the  economic  considerations 
hidden  behind  the  sentimental  speeches  about  the  unity  of  the  two 
 founding races  of Canada. The Canadian Confederation was noth-
ing  more  than  a  vast  financial  transaction  carried  out  by  the  bour-
geoisie  at the expense of the workers  of the country  and  more espe-
cially  the  workers  of  Quebec.  At  the  time  the  Confederation  was 
established   the  railroad  companies   which  had  invested  large 
amounts of capital and were finding it very difficult to meet the com-
petition of the American lines   were on the brink of bankruptcy. The 
Montreal  businessmen  were  afraid  of  losing  their  monopoly  on  the 
trade between England and Canada  a large part of which was begin-
ning  to  pass  by  way  of  New  York  rather  than  Montreal.  Since  rail-
The  White  Niggers  of America  31 
roads  were  considered  at the time  as  the  principal  economic  agents 
of progress   the Montreal businessmen concluded that as  much capi-
tal  as  possible  must  be  invested  in  the  construction  of  a  railroad 
which  would  link  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,- Toronto  to  New  York 
and Quebec via Montreal   and the west to the commercial capital of 
Canada-Montreal. In order to reduce the risks of private enterprise  
they decided that this  money should be taken from  the state coffers; 
that is   from  the pockets of the taxpayers   from the greatest possible 
number of citizens.  As  the heads  of  the Canadian government   Car-
tier  and  Galt  in  particular   were  also  administrators  of  the  Grand 
Trunk   the  most  important  of the  railroad  companies   the operation 
was  relatively  easy  to  carry  out  on  the  legal  level.  The  Maritime 
Provinces  (with  the  exception  of  Newfoundland),  Quebec   and  On-
tario  were  inundated  with  romantic  speeches  about   Canadian  
unity and the prosperity that this  unity could not fail  to bring to  the 
 privileged   inhabitants of the vast  country. 
Once  Confederation had been  voted  by the  House  and  approved 
by London  in complete disregard of popular opinion  Quebec  which 
thirty  years  earlier  under the  influence  of the  Patriots had  dreamed 
of  becoming  a  republic   was  de  facto  turned-by  the  disciples  of 
those  same  Patriots-into  a  minority  within  the  fictitious  bicultural 
and bilingual  Canadian nation  Quebec patched together a govern-
ment from  the few  jurisdictions left to  the provinces   in  the fields  of 
education  social security  and natural resources (hardly developed at 
the  time).  The  federal  government  retained  control  of  currency  
banking   commerce   customs   immigration   foreign  policy   etc.,  and 
applied from  the beginning a  policy of centralization that worked to 
the  advantage  of the  financial  circles  concentrated in  Montreal  and 
Toronto. The capital that was gathered together by uniting the prov-
inces  was  invested  in  the  private  railroad  companies   which  there-
upon experienced unprecedented expansion.  The Confederation was 
no  sooner  born  than  it  set  off  down  the  road  toward  its  first  bank-
ruptcy   its  first  economic  crisis   for  which  the  workers  would   as  al-
ways   pay the bill. 
Already  in  1840   the  Anglo-Saxons   who  possess  a  keen  sense  of 
their  own  interests   had  taken  advantage  of  the  climate  of  hysteria 
generated  by  the  French-Canadian  rebellion  to  proclaim  a  provi-
sional  union of the two Canadas (Ontario and Quebec) and to merge 
32  Pierre  Vallieres 
the debts of the two provinces.  Quebec (which  had a  larger popula-
tion and no debts  since the ruling classes had invested nothing in the 
development of an infrastructure)  was thus made to pay for  the con-
siderable deficit created by the construction of many costly canals in 
the  Ontario  of  the  Loyalists.
6 
In  1867  the  Confederation  effected  a 
similar  merger   in  more  attractive  guise.  Quebec  and  the  Maritime 
Provinces  were  made  to  serve  the  economic  interests  of  the Anglo-
Saxon  bourgeoisie  of  Montreal  and  especially  of  Ontario.  Once this 
conquest was  complete   the Fathers of the Confederation undertook 
to  annex  the  west.  The  railroad   accompanied  by  the  army   con-
quered each of the western provinces and bloodily crushed the least 
signs  of resistance  on  the part of the  local populations   in  particular 
the  Metis  (a  people  formed  by  the  intermarriage  of  Indians  and 
French  Canadians  from  Quebec).  The  result  of  crushing  the  Metis 
was to  unify all classes in Quebec against the Confederation  the cen-
tral power  and English Canada only a  few  years after the provinces 
had been united. The Quebecois turned to their own state  the State 
of  Quebec   and tried to  make  the best of their forced  annexation to 
the  rest  of  Canada.  The  federal  government   for  its  part   granted 
them  subsidies  in  order  to  avoid  a  resurgence  of  nationalism.  The 
premiers of Quebec  in particular Honore Mercier  cultivated this na-
tionalism  and  turned  it into  an  instrument  of blackmail   to  the  pro-
found  irritation  of the federal  government.  Daniel Johnson   like Le-
sage  and Duplessis   is  only doing what Mercier did. 
But  French-Canadian  nationalism  did  not  necessarily  provide  a 
living.  The  petty  bourgeoisie   of  course   turned  it  to  good  account 
(while at the same time making deals with the English Canadians and 
the  Americans  behind  the  people s  back).  But  the  condition  of  the 
workers  hardly  improved   even  if  Honore  Mercier  did  his  best  to 
make them believe in  the greatness of their  mission  as  Frenchmen 
and  Catholics  in  North  America.  An  estimated  700 000  French-Ca-
nadian  workers  were  forced  into exile  between  1820 and the end of 
the First World War. For the people do not readily resign themselves 
to  dying  of hunger  .  .  .  even  out  of  patriotism!  Today  the  descen-
dants of these Habitants are to be found in  Louisiana   New  England  
New  Brunswick   Ontario   Manitoba   and  even  British  Columbia. 
(Even  now   in  the  period  of  the   quiet  revolution   and  Expo  67  
The  White Niggers  of America  33 
Quebecois workers  are abandoning their homeland  to go  chop pines 
in British Columbia or bury themselves alive in the mines of northern 
Ontario  and  Manitoba:  a  sure  sign  that   since  the  time  of  Honore 
Mercier   the petty-bourgeois nationalists of the State of Quebec have 
still  not  found  solutions  to  the  agonizing  problems  of  the  French-
Canadian  working  class.  The  workers  of  Quebec  are  fed  up  with 
speeches  flags   hymns   and parades. They want to have their own in-
dustries   control over the sale and consumption of their products  po-
litical  power  and  economic  security   the  privilege  of  studying  and 
sharing in the discoveries  of science   etc.  They no  longer want to  sit 
like beggars on either side of Sherbrooke Street every June 24  to be-
hold   with joy befitting the occasion   the allegorical  floats  of an arti-
ficial   national pride  bought on  credit  at  Household  or Niagara Fi-
nance. The people are going to rise to their feet   parade in the streets 
themselves   and  make  of  this  country  something  other  than  a 
medieval  masquerade  organized  by  grocers  who  can  scarcely  see 
beyond  the borders of their own parish.) 
If Confederation made no  immediate change in the traditional life 
of the people of Quebec   rural  Catholic  and French  it did create 
the economic and political conditions for  the invasion of Quebec and 
the  rest  of  Canada  by  the  American  entrepreneurs  and  financiers. 
Preparations  for  the   real   conquest  were  being  made  in  the  pol-
ished offices of the executive boards in  New York   which were in con-
tinual  contact  with  London  and  in  whose  service  a  whole  army  of 
lackeys  in Toronto   Montreal   Quebec City  and Halifax   were work-
ing feverishly  and spending millions to buy local politicians and busi-
nessmen  and   with  the  complicity  of  the  bishops  and  journalists   to 
lull  the  masses  to  sleep.  Already the British  imperialists controlled a 
large  sector  of  the  Canadian  economy.  But  every  year  the  United 
States  was  taking  a  bigger  slice  of  their  powers  and  privileges.  The 
progressive transfer of financial   industrial   commercial  and political 
hegemony to the Americans could not be effected without provoking 
crises  and  liberating  (for  the  time  being  at least)  new   independent 
energies which were under the illusion that they could compete with 
imperialism.  That  is  why   in  order  to  avoid  clashes  that  would  be 
pointless  (between  capitalists)  and  politically dangerous  (they  might 
set the stage for  popular revolts) the English and American business-
34  Pierre  Vallieres 
men  engaged  in  a  gigantic  underground  bargaining  operation  of 
which  the  people   and  sometimes  even  the  majority  of  politicians  
unaware of the  economic  reality   were  totally ignorant. 
Leaving  the  imperialists  to  silently  invade  the  country   Honore 
Mercier   for  example   converted   colonization   into  a  policy  of  na-
tional salvation and  with the help of the clergy   made the  return to 
the land  into a veritable mystical epic.  This  absurd nationalism was 
dubbed  a   Christian  miracle   and  the  misery  of  the  people  was 
sprinkled with holy  water.  Shanties  were decorated with  dried palm 
leaves   effeminate Sacred Hearts  and bloodless Virgins.   Blessed are 
the poor  for theirs is  the kingdom of Heaven  The religion of degra-
dation   of the  vicious  circle   of  unremitting sacrifice  and  resignation 
to misfortune became  The Imitation of Jesus Christ  But the forces 
of life  were not to be so  easily gainsaid by the requirements of aton-
ing for  sin  and  saving  souls  from  Purgatory. 
Even in this  society dedicated   in  spite of  itself   to the interests of 
the  Holy  Church  of  God  and of His  poor  servants-cardinals   bish-
ops   and  canons-men  were  still  men   basic  needs  were  still  basic 
needs   and  money  was  still  a  vital  necessity.  For the bakeries   hard-
ware  stores   groceries   and clothing  stores   the  doctors   lawyers   no-
taries   and  merchants  of  grain   hens   and  livestock  did  not  fatten 
their  bank  accounts  on  indulgences.  Even  the cures  liked  to  collect 
the  tithe-in hard  cash!  Because  it  took  a  lot  of  money  to  build  ca-
thedrals and presbyteries-those lowly houses of God-out of Italian 
marble!  So  you  always  had  to get  more  money   by working  if possi-
ble.  Or by stealing from  others.  Or finally   in  desperation   by giving 
yourself  up  to  the  money-lenders  of every  village  and  county   who 
asked  nothing better than to   get you out of the hole   the better to 
take the shirt off your back. 
Thus   while God looked on amused   a new social category became 
more  important  every  day:  the  money-lenders.  These   realistic  
Christians (who  would have made excellent Calvinists) placed in cir-
culation  the money that was  to enable the petty bourgeoisie  (profes-
sionals   tradesmen   and clergymen)  to prosper during the end of the 
nineteenth  century   which  marked  the  high  point  of  our  collective 
misery   our  virtues  (the  virtues  of  baptized  slaves),  and  our  impo-
tence  sublimated by Catholicism.  The French-Canadian petty bour-
geoisie  (doubtless  less  Christian than  we   the  blessed  poor)  took  full 
The  White  Niggers  of America  35 
advantage  of our docility   first  by developing trade in  everyday con-
sumer  goods   especially  in  the  countryside   and  later  by  creating 
those thousands of small  family  manufacturing enterprises which are 
so justly celebrated for  the low wages  they have always paid and still 
pay-in the name  of patriotism. 
Toward the end of the nineteenth century  the English   American  
and  Canadian  capitalists  became  aware  of  all  the  advantages  and 
profits  to  be drawn from  Christian Quebec. 
Already   in  order  to  build  their  railroads   they  had  begun  buying 
up  a  number  of  seigneuries  and  driving  the  farmers  out.  Shortly 
thereafter  they  demanded  the  abolition  of  the  seigneurial  regime  
which  restricted  their  freedom  to  build  roads   speculate  in  real  es-
tate   and exploit  the  rich  forests  of Quebec for  export.  It will  be re-
membered  that at that time  the English  forests  had been devastated 
and the British demand for lumber was constantly growing. They im-
mediately  obtained  satisfaction   despite  the  opposition  of  certain 
French-Canadian  seigneurs   including  the   revolutionary   Louis-
Joseph  Papineau   then seigneur of Montebello! 
Seeing  the  abundance  of  cheap  labor  standing  idle  in  the  towns  
suburbs   and  even  remotest   colonies   businessmen  said  to  them-
selves  that  they  must  take  advantage  of  all  these  hands  begging for 
work and use them to exploit cheaply Quebec s vast resources in tim-
ber   minerals   and hydraulic power;  and at the same time to develop 
in  Quebec  certain  industries  based  on  the  exploitation  of  cheap 
labor   such as  the  textile  industry   which was  flourishing  at the time. 
In  this  way  they  could  create  and  develop   with  a  minimum  of  ex-
pense  and  a  maximum  of profitability   a   Quebecois   economy  that 
would  complement  the  dominant  economies  of the  end of the nine-
teenth  century   those  of Great  Britain  and  the  United  States. 
After  buying  up  the  best  land   these  capitalists  obtained  broad 
lumbering  and  mining  concessions  from  the  provincial  government. 
And  almost  for  nothing.  The  sawmills  multiplied.  The  forests  were 
devastated in  record time.  Thousands of  colonists  became lumber-
jacks.  Little by little the lumber industry reached out to every region 
of Quebec   and the great majority of farmers began to sell their labor 
to the lumber companies  at least for  several months of the year. The 
French Canadians  peasants in spite of themselves  became  a people 
of hewers of wood and drawers of water  The textile industry began 
36  Pierre  Vallieres 
to  develop  in  turn   particularly  in  the  Montreal  region  and  in  the 
Eastern Townships.  A whole  army of workers-men  women   young 
people-were turned into slaves of the spinning jennies and looms in 
factories  where  there  was  neither  light  nor  air  nor  safety.  Wages 
were  low   accidents  frequent   diseases  numerous  and  sometimes 
fatal.  (These  conditions have not changed.)  Finally   at the beginning 
of the  twentieth century   asbestos began to  be mined  in  the Eastern 
Townships  and gold  copper  and zinc in Abitibi; hydraulic resources 
were exploited for  the manufacture of newsprint on the St.  Maurice 
and of aluminum  ingots  in  Saguenay-Lake St.  John. 
The  proletarianization  of  the   rural   Catholic   and  French  
French Canadians and the urbanization of medieval Quebec became 
irreversible.  The   return  to  the  city   needed  no  propagandists;  it 
happened of its  own  accord   like  any  natural phenomenon. 
While  continuing to  preach  return to the land    buy at home  
and the  call of the race   the clergy and the petty bourgeoisie were 
taking  advantage  of  the  industrialization  of Quebec   particularly  in 
the  region  around  Montreal  where  a  considerable  number  of  in-
dustries  were  being  installed   close  to  the  financial  and  commercial 
institutions   communications   and the headquarters of the masters of 
the  economy  (most  of  them  foreigners).  The  petty  bourgeois  paid 
court  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  businessmen  and   on  the  periphery  of  the 
fiefs  reserved for  the bigshots of imperialism  began to establish hun-
dreds  of small   family  industries for  the manufacture of products for 
domestic  consumption:  furniture   clothing   shoes   candles   food  and 
drink.  (Later  around 1920  they would secure additional revenue by 
taking  control  of  the  food   dairy   and  loan  cooperatives   and  espe-
cially  of the cooperative credit unions.)  Around  the turn of the cen-
tury  a  few  French  Canadians  launched  out  into  big  industry:  rail-
roads  (Senecal),  lumber  (Dubuc),  textiles  (Hudon),  wholesale  trade 
(Paquet).  But their rise  was  as  short-lived as  it was  rapid.  They were 
unable to resist the formidable American financial offensive launched 
at the  beginning of the twentieth century and not yet ended. 
In  fact   a  number  of Americans  had  already  undertaken  the  eco-
nomic  conquest of Quebec  in the middle  of the  nineteenth  century  
without being too sure whether they should rely  on British imperial-
ism   which was still very powerful  or on the new American imperial-
ism   which  was  much  more  dynamic.  These   knights  of  industry  
The  White  Niggers  of America  37 
these  adventurers of the dollar   had neither patriotism nor  national 
interests  They had only class interests and all they cared about was 
their  own  fortunes.  Capital was  at one  and the same  time  their reli-
gion   their  politics   and  their  reason  for  living.  Their  language  was 
the language of business. Their empire was the world market of capi-
tal  and  goods  produced  by  an  anonymous  mass  of  cheap  labor  for 
which  they  had  only  contempt.  They  manufactured  Law   Justice  
Democracy   and the Rights  of Man from  day to  day   as  these served 
the  unlimited  growth  of  their  investments  and  profits.  Their  great 
ambition was to take possession of the world in the name of the Dol-
lar  which God gave to businessmen so  that (along with the Pope and 
the Archbishop  of  Canterbury)  they  might  worship  Him   love  Him  
and serve  Him  in  the gilded  basilicas   abbeys   and  cathedrals  of the 
Church of poor little Jesus. 
These  American  Christians   who  constantly  invoked  the  name  of 
God  in  their  apologias  of  capitalism   made  friends  with  the  higher 
clergy  of  Quebec  and  the  heads  of  the  Quebec  government  just  as 
quickly as  with  the financial  circles of Montreal.  Religious communi-
ties were invited to join them and invest in banks  commerce  and in-
dustry.  (It was at this time that the Montreal clergy began to demand 
that Rome give  them a cardinal  who   with the prestige and financial 
powers  attached  to  his  rank   would  be  in  a  position  to  promote  the 
interests  of the  Church by negotiating the most  advantageous  trans-
actions possible.  All  that  of course   for  the propagation of the Faith: 
in China   the Congo   and Peru.  Still   it  cannot be said  that the Vati-
can  bureaucracy hastened  to  give  satisfaction  to  the  tonsured  bour-
geois  of the Canadian  See!) 
From  the time  they arrived  in  Canada   the Americans   who  came 
from  New  York   Pennsylvania   or  the New  England states   practiced 
a  double allegiance  to English capitalism and American capitalism  
waiting to see which country would in the end eliminate the other in 
the  frantic  competition  they  were  carrying  on  as  they  multiplied 
agreements   understandings   and treaties on  matters of  common in-
terest   These  great  entrepreneurs-who  were  often  men  of genius 
in  their  specialty-gave  a  vigorous  stimulus  to  the  exploitation  of 
Quebec s  natural  resources   took  control  of  the  most  profitable  sec-
tors of the infant French-Canadian industry   and soon bought the al-
legiance of almost all the premiers of Quebec who came after the na-
38  Pierre  Vallieres 
tionalist  Honore  Mercier  and  of  most  of  the  prime  ministers  of 
Canada   starting  with  the  French-Canadian   Sir   Wilfred  Laurier. 
At  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century   they  were  convinced  that 
England  would  continue  to  lose  ground  and  that in  a  few  years  the 
United States would be master of the world-which the evolution of 
imperialism  in  the twentieth  century was  to  confirm. 
The Americans encountered no opposition within the Quebec gov-
ernment  no  matter which party was in power.  Nearly all the succes-
sive  premiers of Quebec  were invited to  sit  on  the executive  boards 
of one  or another of their enterprises.  The electoral machines  of the 
two traditional  parties were  also  well  provided  for   and the business 
circles got on as  well  with  the  reds  as  with  the  blues  
At the federal level  the Americans rapidly took control of the Lib-
eral  Party   while   les  British  who  had a  sentimental attachment to 
the English Crown and managed British interests in Canada  had the 
Conservative  Party  well  in  hand.  The  struggles  between  the  two 
parties only reflected the extension to Canada of the competition be-
tween  English  and  American  imperialism  for  control  of  the  world 
market.  But while Great Britain increasingly alienated public opinion 
by  its  openly  imperialist  and  racist  policy   its  colonial  wars  (such  as 
the  Boer  War),  its  ridiculous  attachment  to  the  gilded  remains  of a 
sanctimonious  and  conservative  monarchy   its  contempt  for  the 
French  Canadians  and  for   colored   peoples   its  hypocritical  and 
inflexible  legalism  and  so  on   the  United  States   equally  racist   im-
perialistic   and hypocritical-but more  intelligent and wily-quietly 
effected  the  economic  and   I  might  say   the   spiritual   conquest  of 
Canada   especially  Quebec and Ontario. 
The  French-Canadian  petty bourgeoisie   in  particular  the   think-
ing  elite  ignorant of economic and social reality  of its origin  its his-
torical  development   and the direction  of its  evolution   and perceiv-
ing the  world  through  the  idees  fixes  of an  immutable  system   as  in 
the Middle Ages   spoke to  the people in  a language  that did not cor-
respond  in  the  least  with  the  reality  of  the  daily  life  of  the  worker. 
Henri  Bourassa  and  his  disciples  were  still  talking  about   return  to 
the land   and  Canadian independence   vis-a-vis  Great  Britain at a 
time when the urbanization of Quebec was an irreversible phenome-
non  and the Americans were taking control of the economic activity 
and even  the politics  of Quebec.  The  tutelage legally  exercised  over 
The  White  Niggers  of America  39 
Canada by  London  was  now  only  symbolic.  The  Dominion  of Can-
ada   already shaky   was changing into an economic colony of Yankee 
America.  And  within  this  vast  colony   Quebec  was  no  longer  any-
thing  but the poor appendage of a  foreign  economy. 
Bourassa s  speeches  were  of  no  use  to  anyone  except  the  small-
minded  petty  bourgeois  for  whom  attachment  to  the  values  of  the 
past  meant  the  subjugation  of the  people  to  their  own  narrow  eco-
nomic  interests. 
It is  thanks  to  this  parochial  mentality  that  the  French-Canadian 
petty  bourgeoisie  was  not  completely  swept  away  by  the  economic 
offensive  of  the  Americans  in  the  twentieth  century.  Supported  by 
one  of  the  most  powerful  clergies  in  the  world   this  class  of  profes-
sionals   small industrialists  small tradesmen  and small financiers  has 
succeeded in  preserving and  even  strengthening  its  role  as  an  inter-
mediary between the people  on the one hand  and  on the other  the 
foreigners  who  hold  the  economic  power and  the  English-Canadian 
bourgeois who  control federal politics.  The provincial state was  (and 
still is)  its licensed instrument of domination and betrayal  a means of 
perpetually  bargaining  over  the  collective  wealth  and  auctioning  it 
off   an enterprise for hoodwinking the masses and debasing the whole 
political life of Quebec.  For the last hundred years the State of Que-
bec has been nothing more than the legal  form  of the dictatorship of 
the  most  reactionary  strata of the  French-Canadian petty bourgeoi-
sie-and  their  silent  partners  of  the  Rue  Saint-Jacques-over  the 
vast  majority  of the  population of Quebec   for  whom  the sole  politi-
cal activity permitted by the system is  the famous  right to vote  the 
absurd  freedom  to  choose  which  of two   three   five   or eight thieves 
will  be granted the privilege  of exploiting the  masses! 
The  industrial revolution of the beginning of the century radically 
changed the way of life  of the Quebecois   or rather it urbanized and 
modernized  their  three-centuries-old  slavery.  The  population  be-
came  concentrated  in  the cities  which   with  the  exception  of Mont-
real   were-and  still  are-only  huge  underindustrialized  villages  
poor and without a future.  Montreal rapidly became the center of at-
traction for  the  hewers of wood and drawers of water  Many found 
work there and a little security  but Montreal alone could not absorb 
all the unemployed and poor of Quebec. Already in  1920 the propor-
tion  of  unemployed  in  Montreal  was  steadily  rising.  And  when  the 
40  Pierre  Vallieres 
crisis of 1929 broke   the  •  .memployed and the poor of the big city ex-
perienced  a  misery  even  more  terrible  than  that  of the  countryside. 
Social  agitation expanded with  the  depression  of  the  thirties.  The 
union movement made enormous progress  and socialism began to re-
cruit sympathizers and  propagandists in  Montreal.  Strikes  and dem-
onstrations of discontent multiplied.  In 1937 riots broke out in  Sorel  
leaving  dead  and  wounded.  The  port  of  Montreal  was  more  than 
once  transformed  into  a  battlefield   and  the  textile  workers  rose  up 
against  their  exploiters.  Finally   when  the  second   conscription  cri-
sis   broke  out  during  the  war   insurrections  occurred  all  over   and 
Quebec experienced the beginning of a popular revolution.
7 
Already  
during  the  First  World  War   the  draft  had  provoked  violent  out-
breaks   and every night for  three months the streets of Montreal had 
been  invaded  by  thousands  of  angry  workers  demanding  the  over-
throw of the system and trying to procure arms.
8 
But these spontane-
ous uprisings had not given birth to any popular  political  revolution-
ary organization. On the one hand   the workers  leaders were for  the 
most part dominated  if not terrorized   by the clergy   who systemati-
cally  blocked  every  attempt  at  revolutionary  organization  of  the 
working  class.  On  the  other  hand   the   anti-draft   leaders  of  the 
forties  were  petty  bourgeois  who  had  no  real  influence  over  the 
workers.  They  were  disciples  of  Bourassa  and  Canon  Groulx   intel-
lectuals who were often sympathetic to Mussolini and Hitler  anti-Se-
mitic  and  racist.  They were incapable of mobilizing  popular discon-
tent around a concrete program of social reforms   and all they did   in 
sum   was  to  prepare  the  ground  for  Duplessis  by  their  exacerbated 
nationalism.
9 
After the war  apathy  withdrawal  and indifference followed  once 
more  upon  the  disappointed  hopes  that  had  been  raised  by  the  un-
ionists  the Communists  and the anti-draft groups.  Duplessis entered 
upon  his  reign  without opposition.  He  took  advantage  of the fact  to 
cede the rich iron deposits of northern Quebec to the Americans and  
with their financial  assistance   to endow his  party with the  most  for-
midable  political  machine Quebec and Canada had ever known. 
The  cooperative  movement  and  the  union  movement   both  of 
which  (with  few  exceptions)  were  controlled by the Church and the 
traditional petty bourgeoisie   were put into the service of the slogans 
 buy  at  home    French-Canadian  thrift   (monopolized  by  the 
The  White  Niggers  of America  41 
Desjardins  Credit  Unions),  and  the   preservation  of faith   language  
and  religion   Certain  union  leaders  even  preached   return  to  the 
land   and  the  abolition  of any policy  favoring  immigration   because 
in their eyes  the immigrants were  only   stealing jobs and land  The 
chaplains  exercised  a  despotic  reign  over  the  unions  and  coopera-
tives   as  did the cures over the parishes and the bishops over the dio-
ceses.  For the Church  while it had been struggling against the rural 
exodus  ever since the beginning of the Cflltury   had had the wisdom 
to provide priests for  the thousands of workers in the cities who were 
 exposed  to  vice   pernicious  ideas   and  Communism   The  laymen 
who dared tell the priests to concern themselves more with God and 
a little less  with  politics  and  union  affairs  were  automatically  called 
 rebels  and  Communists  calumnied and persecuted. The Middle 
Ages would not be the Middle Ages  without a well-organized Inquis-
ition.10  And  despite  the  efforts  of the  American  capitalists   God  did 
not  want  Quebec  to  lose  its  medieval  character.  It s  a  wonder  the 
Holy Virgin  did  not  appear to  some  child   the way  she  did  in  Portu-
gal  to entreat us to obey those who were carrying on the work of the 
schizophrenic  Bishop  Laval  who   in  the  seventeenth  century   had 
laid  the foundations  of the madhouse we  were living in. 
The  American  unions  with  branches  in  Quebec  were  less  domi-
nated by the obscurantism of the chaplains but they were  more sub-
servient to  the economic  interests of the United States   which  in  the 
end was  just as  bad for  the workers  of Quebec. 
In  1949  striking asbestos  miners took  control of the city of Asbes-
tos  for  a  few  days  and  refused  to  obey  their leaders   including Jean 
Marchand   and  even  their  cure.  Duplessis   police  crushed  their  re-
volt   and this action aroused  the people against the  monarch  of  the 
great darkness  
11 
The Asbestos strikers received sympathy  support  
and material aid from  all sides.  A few  years later  in  1957  the miners 
of Murdochville  on the Gaspe peninsula  rose up in turn  and the op-
position  to  Duplessis  grew  deeper  and  more  widespread.  Spontane-
ous strikes broke out in various corners of Quebec  and Duplessis  po-
litical  police  became  increasingly  hard  on  the  workers.  The  union 
movement got rid of the chaplains and the advocates of blind obedi-
ence to the Very Catholic Leader-who went to  Mass  and took com-
munion  every  morning.  Some  of  the  Quebec  intellectuals  began  to 
concern  themselves  with   social  sciences   and  founded   left   re-
42  Pierre  Vallieres 
views.  Weeklies  like  Jacques  Hebert s  newspaper  Vrai  revealed  the 
true  face  of  Duplessism  to  the people.  The   Coffin  affair   o  among 
others   forced  tens  of  thousands  of  Quebecois   accustomed  to  the 
cunning demagogy  of Duplessis   to  open  their eyes  and reawaken to 
their  responsibilities.  It was  no  longer  possible  for  anyone  to  accept 
injustice  without  protest. 
Quebec awoke only very slowly from  its long winter.  In 1960  after 
years  of  obscure  and  difficult  struggles   of lost  strikes   rigged  trials  
legal assassinations   censorship and inquisition  eleven years after As-
bestos   the  unexpected  victory  of  the  Liberals  and  the  coming  to 
power of the  socialist  Rene Levesque marked the end of  the great 
darkness   and  the beginning of  the quiet  revolution   All  the  insti-
tutions  of  Quebec  were  publicly  called  into  question.  Secularism  
separatism  and  Marxism  shattered the apparent              The tra-
ditional  monolithic  ideology  was  broken.  Pressure  groups   patriotic 
organizations   and political  parties  separated  into  opposing  factions. 
New groups and parties were founded.  Political reviews and newspa-
pers  multiplied.  Young  people were seized with  a  desire  to  read and 
to know   and the book trade enjoyed an unprecedented expansion. A 
hearty  appetite  for  truth and a  fierce  need for  freedom  took  hold  of 
the  nation.  God  made  a  terrible  grimace  and  the  bishops  called  an 
urgent  meeting to  invoke  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  gospel  of resignation  and  the  apologia  of slavery were ripped 
up with an enthusiasm mixed with an obscure instinct for  vengeance. 
And  more  than  one  man  who  had helped  to  manufacture  the  tradi-
tional  ideology  and had profited  from  it began  to  suffer  from  insom-
nia and break into sweat dreaming of civil war.  Like in Spain     .  .  Is 
it possible?  .  .  .  Rich men and priests executed  .  .  .  Factories in the 
hands of workers  .  .  .  Churches burned to the ground  .  .  .  The so-
cialists  in  power        The  simple  announcement  by  the  Liberals 
that  they  intended  to  modernize-that  is    bring  up  to  date   -the 
teaching dispensed to  the youth of Quebec sowed panic among most 
of  the  venerable  and  undisputed   bosses   of  traditional  education; 
especially among the bishops   who  finally  succeeded in quietly sabo-
• Wilbert Coffin   a prospector from  the Gaspe   was  accused of the murder of three 
American  hunters  from  Pennsylvania.  Coffin   whom  many  believed  to  be  innocent  
was convicted on circumstantial evidence and hanged on  February 10   1956.  (Trans.) 
The  White  Niggers  of America  43 
taging  educational  reform   with  the  complicity  of  Ti-Jean-la-Taxe-
Lesage   who had only defended reform  (which  his  Minister of Edu-
cation  wanted  very  much)  in  order  to  win  re-election  in  1962.  But 
the bishops   sabotage was  a partial defeat for  the Church   which has 
never been  so  discredited in  the eyes of the people as  it  is  today.  To 
be sure   the churches are still filled  with the faithful on Sundays  and 
most  people  believe  in  God.  But  the  Quebecois  are  disgusted  with 
the  comfortable  priests  who  lead  the  lives  of  millionaires  in  their 
richly  furnished  presbyteries  and  drink  Scotch  on  the  money  of  the 
poor.  As  for  the young people  not only are they anti-clerical  but the 
majority  of  them  refuse  to  go  to  church  on  Sunday  to  watch  the 
empty and incomprehensible rituals of another age and to pay for  the 
show besides  if only so  much as  25 cents.  Do they believe in God   in 
Jesus Christ  in  Mohammed or Buddha? I don t know.  But I have the 
impression  that they believe  first  of  all  in  themselves  and in  human-
ity   and  that   unlike  their  parents   they  are  not  prepared to  sacrifice 
their earthly life  for  a hypothetical celestial happiness. 
Notwithstanding  the  opposition  of  those  who  had  formerly 
profited from  obscurantism   the   quiet revolution   completely upset 
the habits of thought of the Quebecois  who for  the first  time in their 
history-thanks  partly  to  the  prodigious  development  of  television  
radio   and  the  press-witnessed  a   national   debate  that  enabled 
them  all  to  ask  questions   discuss  their  problems  openly   and  take 
sides.  The   quiet  revolution   liberated  hitherto  unsuspected  ener-
gies   and the reformist  Liberals were  the unconscious instruments of 
unprecedented  social  ferment.  Every  level  of  society   every  class  
took  a position  in  accordance  with  its  present condition and its  fun-
damental  interests.  The  petty  bourgeoisie  expressed  its  traditional 
nationalism  with  new  vigor.  However   a  broad  faction  of  the  petty 
bourgeoisie secularized this nationalism and transformed it into a res-
olutely  separatist  and  lay  movement.  For  the  first  time  since  1837  
the  petty bourgeoisie  set  itself political   economic   and  social  objec-
tives that were precise enough to constitute a complete political pro-
gram  (a  program  for  the  petty-bourgeois  class  and  not  the  working 
class).  Today  there remains  no  doubt that the entire petty bourgeoi-
• Jean  Lesage  earned his  nickname by imposing heavy taxes  to  finance  his  reforms  
notably  new  schools.  This policy helped defeat him.  (Trans.) 
44  Pierre  Vallieres 
sie   from  the traditional nationalists to the separatists  are demanding 
a new division of power. The Canadian Confederation is  at the point 
of  death  at  the  very  moment  when  it  is  beginning  to  celebrate  its 
centennial  in  an  effort  to  believe  it  will  survive   like  a  half-uncon-
scious  victim  of cancer  who  refuses  to  make  his  will  and  persists  in 
denying the  death  that is  devouring him. 
In  Ottawa   only  a  small  minority  of Quebecois who  are  either be-
hind the times  blind  or ambitious for their own careers (I m not sure 
which)  still  believe  that  Lafontaine   Cartier   and  Laurier  were  not 
traitors  and  are  desperately  calling  for  a  constitutional  miracle  that 
will save the Confederation.  How  without denying history  can these 
intelligent  men  believe  and  declare  that  it  is  in  the  interests  of 
French Canadians to perpetuate a  pact  which in  reality they never 
concluded  and which  was  imposed  on  them  in  the same  way  as  the 
recent Canadian-American treaty on free  trade in automobile parts? 
Can  Messrs.  Marchand   Favreau   Sauve   Pelletier   and  Trudeau tell 
us  when the French-Canadian people were democratically consulted 
on  this  famous   pact of confederation  for love  of which  these gen-
tlemen  were  willing  to  compromise  themselves  with  the  stinking  
scandal-ridden  Liberal  stable?  And  with  the  Liberals   impotent 
leader   that  darling  of  President  Lyndon  B.  Johnson   that  insipid 
prime minister for whom  it would be worth instituting a  Nobel Prize 
for  Incompetence? Decidedly  the great men who lived through (sic) 
Asbestos  must have gone through some  pretty traumatic experiences 
under  the  reign  of  Duplessis.  They  are  still  haunted  by   the  great 
darkness   And  their   politique  fonctionnelle   is  thrashing  around 
like  a  man  who  is  suffocating  from  having  swallowed  too  much 
smoke  
• The  phrase  ..  politique fonctionnelle  refers  to  an article  entitled  .. Pour  une  poli-
tique  fonctionnelle:  un  manifeste   (  .. A  Manifesto  for  Realism  in  Politics"),  by  Pierre 
Elliott Trudeau  Marc Lalonde (now one of Trudeau s chief advisers),  and others. This 
article appeared in  1964   at a time when Trudeau  together with  Gerard Pelletier and 
Jean  Marchand  (both  now  ministers  in  the  federal  government),  was  preparing to  go 
into Liberal politics.  The manifesto expounded the authors  views on .. functional poli-
tics   (or  .. pragmatism  in  politics   as  the  phrase  i§  sometimes  translated),  that is   the 
necessity of dealing with practical social problems rather than with grand schemes and 
ideologies  (i.e.,  separatism  and  Marxism).  The Trudeau government  still  considers  it-
self to  be carrying out this  manifesto.  (Trans.) 
The  White  Niggers  of America  45 
While  the  founders  of the   cite  libre     imprisoned in the Parlia-
ment  in  Ottawa  as  members  or  ministers   pace  back  and  forth  in 
their offices like madmen unaware of their madness  ceaselessly turn-
ing over in  their tired brains ideas that men of healthy minds do  not 
even want to discuss   the French-Canadian workers fix  their eyes  on 
Quebec. All  the promises of reforms and  revolutions  that the petty 
bourgeoisie in power (the Liberal Party) waved in front of the people 
(educational revolution   social revolution   revolution here   revolution 
there)  have  aroused  new  needs  and  deeply  stirred  old  hopes  that 
have  given  birth  to  a  feeling  of  urgency  among  the  most  disadvan-
taged  layers  of  the  population.  The   ignorant   whom  Lesage  de-
spises   want  their  share  of the feast   their  ample  share.  Do  they not 
constitute  90  percent  of  this  nation  that  has  just  been  promised  a 
new life  free from  fear   ignorance   and servitude? 
The promises of 1960 are still the promises of 1966 except  in part  
in  the  field  of  education.  Promises  are  even  postponed  indefi-
nitely.  And with Danny Boy in power   some people are wondering if 
the  promises  that  are  kept  by  the   new  regime   will  not  be  con-
signed to oblivion tomorrow.  Since his surprising election   Mr.  Daniel 
Johnson has been talking a lot about independence  but he also  talks 
about breaking strikes   cutting social expenditures  and granting new 
privileges  to  foreign  investors.  How  can  Mr.  Johnson  reconcile  his 
policy  of independence with his  unequivocal invitation  to  American 
investors   whose  economic  activity   in  the  words  of  the  economist 
Andre  Gunder  Frank   can  only   develop  underdevelopment   and 
impoverish  us  collectively  and  individually  until  Quebec  is  nothing 
but a  country  in  ruins?  Naturally   Mr.  Johnson  will  not  answer you  
because it is not in his party s interest to do so.  But as  my father used 
to  say    we re not  crazy  
In  recent  years   taxes  have  been  steadily  going  up  in  order  to 
finance  these  so-called  reforms  which  the  people  have  not  yet been 
allowed  to  see   as  though they were state secrets.  Where has all  this 
• The phrase   the founders of the   cite libre'" is  an ironic allusion to Trudeau  Pel-
letier   and others.  In  1950   these  men founded  the  magazine  Cite  libre  (in  which  the 
manifesto  on  politique  fonctionnelle  was  to  appear  fourteen  years  later).  The  maga-
zine s  point  of view  was  Catholic   secularist   nuclear  pacifist   anti-Duplessist   social 
democratic  and  later  anti-separatist. Since la  cite is  sometimes used in French in  the 
broad  political sense of  the marketplace  or  public life  Vallieres is making a play 
on  words  to  mock  the  pretensions  of   the founders  of  the   Free  Society.'    (Trans.) 
46  Pierre  Vallieres 
money  gone?  Into  the  pockets  of  the  ministers   the  party hacks   the 
Filions?"  Swallowed  up in  Sidbec   the stillborn  steel works?  Wasted 
on pieces of road or on gifts to certain school board members? Trans-
ferred  to friendly  capitalists in  the form  of  industrial loans"?  Given 
to the Americans  in  payment  of interest  on  the ever increasing  na-
tional debt"? Invested in projects for  the centennial of the Confeder-
ation and the  Expo  of the capitalists? 
In 1962  Social  Credit gave the first  concrete formulation  to popu-
lar  discontent   and  Caouette s  party   finding  support  in  the  old  re-
sentment  of  the  French-Canadian  farmers  and  workers  against  the 
capitalists   swept  Quebec  in  the  federal  elections. t  The  creditistes 
disappointed  the workers by their internal  quarrels  and  incongruous 
statements   but  popular  discontent  continued  to  grow.  Two  years 
later  strikes  broke  out  pretty  much  all  over.  Lesage  wanted  to 
muzzle  the  press   and  conflicts  multipled  in  journalistic  circles.  La 
Presse   Le Soleil   L  Action   La  Tribune  went  through  difficult  times. 
The very long strike  of the employees  of La Presse   a strike  that had 
a strong political coloration   made the population aware of the prob-
lem  of freedom  of opinion  and  the  right  to  information.  The people 
understood  that  in  trying  to  censor  newspapers   the  Liberals  were 
trying  to  hide  the  truth  from  them   and  that  this  was  being done  at 
the instigation  of the very men  who  had launched  the  reform  move-
ment. 
Strikes  increased  in  number  and  intensity.  The  Liberals  became 
professional strike-breakers and club-swingers.  Their speeches boiled 
down  to  irresponsible  denunciations  that  were  pointless  and  some-
times  even  hysterical.  The people  saw  them  as  their  worst  enemies. 
In the elections of June  1966   Lesage s  crowd received  a  vote  of no-
confidence.  The  National  Union  Party was  carried back  to power in 
spite  of  itself-and  in  spite  of  the  workers   who  could  not  choose 
their  methods.  But  never  fear.  The  workers  of  Quebec  may  have 
voted against Lesage so  as  not to go  through another period of  great 
•  Gerard  Filion   long  a  Catholic  Farmers   Union  official  and  suburban  mayor   later 
director of Le Devoir  is  now president of Marine Industries  a mixed state-private cor-
poration.  He is  an  anti-nationalist and an  advocate of the  view  that his  fellow  French 
Canadians should  forget  about separatism  and acquire the business  sense  of the Eng-
lish  in order to get ahead.  (Trans.) 
t Social Credit is  a  right-wing  religious fundamentalist   anti-separatist party with a 
working-class  orientation.  It rose  from  obscurity in  the  elections  mentioned.  (Trans.) 
The  White Niggers  of America  47 
darkness   but do  you  think  they are  going to let themselves be bur-
dened  for  long  with  Daniel  Johnson  and  his  clique  of  upstarts  who 
are in the pay of the Americans and the most reactionary elements of 
the nationalistic petty bourgeoisie? And do you really think the work-
ers of Quebec are going to go on playing at elections indefinitely   for 
the fun  of it   every four  years   just because the system  asks  them to? 
Hunting rifles  can sometimes be used  for  other things  besides shoot-
ing  deer. 
At the time these lines are written  there is  nothing to indicate that 
there  will  be  a  slowdown  in  popular  demands:  violence  is  breaking 
out  everywhere.  Farmers   workers   and  students  make  no  secret  of 
their profound dissatisfaction  and constantly manifest  it in  one form 
or  another.  The  government  of  Quebec  is  finding  it  harder  and 
harder  to  master  the  situation.  Especially  since  the  state  coffers  are 
empty and it is  impossible  for  the party in  power   whichever it may 
be  to  think up lasting remedies  to  quiet  the  muttering storm. 
While the working and agricultural class  (farmers  however   repre-
sent  only  6  percent  of the  total  labor  force)  is  slowly  and  painfully 
developing class  consciousness-without which  no  revolution  is  pos-
sible-the Americans are seizing more and more  of our national pat-
rimony.  It is  estimated that today they control  directly or indirectly  
80  percent  of  the  economy  of  Quebec.  By  means  of  an  increasing 
number of long-term loans  they capture an ever growing share of the 
revenues of the State of Quebec in the form  of interest and thus hold 
back  any  possibility  of  autonomous  development.  Even  if  Quebec 
gets all  the taxes back from  Ottawa  this additional revenue will soon 
pass into the hands of the Americans  who constitute the main obsta-
cle  to  the  economic  independence  of  Quebec.  As  for  paper  inde-
pendence   Washington couldn t care less.  What difference  does  that 
fiction  make so long as American interests are safeguarded? Imperial-
ism  is  not interested in flags:  one flag  more or less in no  way disturbs 
its  universal  system  of  exploitation  of  natural  resources  and  cheap 
labor.  An  obedient   nationalist   government  is  the  surest  ally  for 
Washington   as  Latin America shows by many an example. What the 
Americans  fear  is  socialism   popular  revolution.  With  Daniel  John-
son   as  with Jean  Lesage   they can  rest  easy. 
Seventy thousand in  I 760   the French Canadians of Quebec today 
number more than five  million   out of a total population of about six 
48  Pierre  Vallieres 
million.  Ninety percent of them  belong to the working class   and  to 
that  figure  should  be  added  the  majority  of non-British  immigrants: 
Italians   Greeks   Spaniards   Poles   et al.,  who  represent an important 
percentage of the proletariat of Montreal.  Forty percent of the popu-
lation  of Montreal   according to a  study made  in  1965 by the  Mont-
real  Labor  Council   is  considered   economically  weak   and  in  the 
                    two-thirds  of  the  French-Canadian  population 
lives-the proportion of poor people   unemployed   seasonal workers  
and welfare  recipients  is  considerably higher.  With the exception  of 
the area around Montreal  where all the wealth of Quebec is  concen-
trated  and  where  the  headquarters  of  both  indigenous  and  foreign 
exploiters  are  located   most  regions  of  Quebec  are  economically 
chained to a  single  type  of local production controlled from  abroad: 
aluminum  in  Saguenay-Lake  St.  John   pulp  and  paper  in  the  St. 
Maurice  Valley   copper  in  Abitibi   iron  on  the  St.  Lawrence  North 
Shore   etc. A drop in the world (or  American) demand for  one or an-
other of these products suffices  to  bring the whole region concerned 
face  to  face  with  famine.  Moreover   only  a  minority  of workers  can 
find  jobs in  these industries   which  are sometimes highly automated; 
and  the  great  majority  of  the  population   vegetate   as  the  saying 
goes   and  spend their time surviving. 
The  Quebec  market  is  flooded  with  foreign  products   and  local 
production of consumer goods  even food   is  reduced every month by 
the overwhelming competition of products imported .from the United 
States   Japan   and elsewhere   a competition that is  completely unre-
stricted.  Prices  rise  steadily  and  so  does  the  indebtedness  of  the 
workers.   Credit  poisons  the life of individuals and insecurity is  the 
general  condition. 
Notwithstanding the unprecedented number and long duration of 
their  struggles   the  workers  of  Quebec  have  not  yet  succeeded  in 
creating an independent political organization  with a view  to  taking 
power  and  radically  transforming  the  society  into  one  of  justice  
equality  and fraternity.  But the idea of such a revolutionary  popular 
organization  and  the  need  for  it  are  becoming  increasingly  clear  to 
the workers   farmers   and  youth  of  Quebec.  The  violent  demonstra-
tions  of  May  24  and July  1   1965   the  recent  conflicts  of  workers  in 
the  textile  industry   in  the  ports. of  Montreal   Trois-Rivieres   and 
Quebec   in  the  La  Grenade  Shoe  Company   in  the  construction 
trades   hospitals   railroads   and  the  post  office   and  the  struggles  of 
The  White Niggers  of America  49 
the  trade-school  students   the  teachers   and  lastly  the  employees  of 
Ayers  at Lachute
0
-to cite only a few-show beyond all doubt that 
the  white niggers of America   are determined to  break the yoke  of 
slavery once  and for  all  and  to  take  the  control of their destiny into 
their own  hands.
12 
After  three  centuries  of  an  entire  people s  mute  and  useless  sub-
mission to the interests of you exploiters   the truth is  at last throwing 
a  glaring  light  on  everything   and you  must  not  expect  the  popular 
revolt  that  is  brewing to  concern  itself   Messrs.  bourgeois  and bish-
ops   with  what  is  going  to  happen  to  your  privileges  and  your  re-
spectable  persons  when  it  breaks  out-pitiless  and  inevitable  out-
come  of  the  system  of  exploitation  and  enslavement  which  you 
yourselves  established and developed. 
  
While  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  call  the  people  of  Quebec  white 
niggers   they are not  the only whites  in  America who   deserve  this 
degrading title.  The industrial revolution of the eighteenth and nine-
teenth centuries drove from  Europe millions of peasants and workers 
who  came  to  America  in  search  of  freedom  as  well  as  work  and 
bread.  Only a small  number of them  succeeded in  growing rich and 
enjoying  the  freedom  of  enterprise  which   on  this  continent   is 
bought at great price. The majority of immigrants have  remained the 
hired  servants  of  the   first  white  men   the  entrepreneurs  of  the 
superior  English  race   who  ever  since  the  time  of the  W ashingtons  
Jeffersons   and Franklins have considered themselves the sole propri-
etors of North America. These immigrants  despised by the European 
capitalists  were welcomed with open arms by the founders  of Amer-
ican  democracy   who  badly  needed  cheap  labor  in  order  to  make 
maximum profits out of the labor and capital they had invested in the 
American  colonies  since  the  seventeenth  century.  The   first  white 
men   became  accumulators  of profits   speculators  and businessmen  
while the newcomers were invited to cooperate  by selling their labor 
by the hour   in  the rapid development of this gigantic country which 
was  supposed  to  belong to  them. 
The  famous   melting pot   was-and still  is-a snare  and  a  delu-
sion. There was  a  melting pot  at the level of the wage earners  the 
•  Ayers   refers  to  three  companies:  Dominion  Ayers  Wood   Ayers  Blankets   and 
Beautyrest Mattresses   all  owned  by  Gilbert Ayers.  (Trans.) 
50  Pierre  Vallieres 
unemployed  the poor  those who struggled to survive.  But there was 
never  a   melting pot   at the level  of the American  aristocracy   the 
class  of the big bourgeoisie   the financiers  and professional imperial-
ists. 
Furthermore   American  democracy  developed  a  spirit  of division 
in the working class that has enabled the bourgeoisie to dominate the 
enormous  and extremely  mobile  mass  of cheap  labor without  much 
difficulty.  First   American  democracy  kept  immigrants  from  the 
Christian countries of Europe as far as possible from the blacks. It or-
ganized black slavery in the South  white slavery in the North.  Later  
it conquered the West   and the new rich  of Texas and California or-
ganized  Mexican  and  Indian slavery.  In the  North   the Yankee  elite 
divided  the  white  slaves  into   colonies":  Italian   Irish   Polish   Ger-
man  Puerto Rican   etc. The second  industrial  revolution   stimulated 
by the  war of 1939   gave  rise  to  an exodus of southern blacks  to the 
big industrial cities of the North. The white slaves  already grappling 
with  unemployment   greeted  their  black  brothers   who  were  even 
poorer than they  like enemies. The unions  which were organizations 
of the  white  slaves  of big  industry   were  closed  to  the  newcomers. 
Racism   which  had  already  turned  the  South  into  a  veritable  hell  
poisoned  working-class  life  in  most  of  the  cities  of  the  North.  The 
blacks  were  penned  up  in  ghettos  where  the  misery  exceeded  any-
thing  that  the  various   colonies   of  white  slaves  had  known.  The 
workers   struggle against capitalist exploitation was compromised by 
fierce  hatred  of  the  blacks   engendered  by  the  racist  ideology.  Fi-
nanced by the exploiters of white and black workers alike  racism en-
abled capitalism to  delay popular revolution in the  United States for 
many decades.  By  keeping the workers at each others  throats for  ir-
rational reasons   racism made it easier for the big bourgeoisie to sabo-
tage  the  American  union  movement  and  protected  the  millionaires 
from  the  disagreeable  experience  of having  to  curtail  their profits  a 
little  in  order  to  finance  social  reforms.  The  union  movement   con-
trolled by speculators who were tied to the financial  and political in-
terests of the  Warfare State  supported the official policy of Wash-
ington  and became the surest ally  of the big corporations.  Disgusted 
and in  revolt   thousands of white slaves   who had been ardent union 
members before the war  set off hundreds of wildcat strikes in protest 
against the joint dictatorship of the unions and the companies. As  for 
The  White Niggers  of America  51 
the blacks shut up in their ghettos   they rose up en masse and set fire 
to  their  miserable  poverty.  Automation brought  with  it  a  considera-
ble increase in  the number of persons unemployed or on welfare  and 
a  few  years  ago  the  State  Department  had  to  admit  publicly  that 
there were fifty  million poor in the United States  or nearly a third of 
the  total  population.  Today  the  unemployed  number  three  million  
while  the  young  people   particularly  those  who  belong to  the work-
ing  class   have  no  idea  what  the  future  may  hold  for  them.  The 
blacks   the  Puerto  Ricans   and  the  Mexican-Americans  engage  in 
more  and  more  demonstrations and  riots.  Thousands  of them fill  the 
prisons   North  and  South.  Black  Power  is  organizing   inspiring  the 
most  conscious  elements  of  the  working  class  with  the  idea  and 
the necessity of  Workers   Power  The war in Vietnam has aroused 
the  youth  against  the  state.  Groups  opposing  the  war   fascism   and 
capitalism  are  multiplying across  the  country.  Class  consciousness  is 
developing  despite  the  long  history  of  senseless  hatreds  that  has  so 
weakened the movement for workers  demands in America in the last 
thirty  years.  It  is  a  slow  process   but little  by  little  racism  is  giving 
way to solidarity. The big-business nature of the unions  although dis-
credited   still  remains  a  major  obstacle  to  the  emancipation  of  the 
workers   but the  workers  are beginning to  find  more  direct and vio-
lent ways of asserting their rights than collective bargaining and legal 
strikes.  The blacks are at the head of the movement   followed by the 
Puerto Ricans of New York and the agricultural workers of California 
and  Texas.  These  slaves  learned  long  ago  to  mix  their  blood  with 
their anger.  The white slaves   who  are just beginning to awake  from 
the long nightmare  of racism   will  not  take long to discover that it is 
in  their interest to follow  the  colored  workers who long ago set out 
ahead of  them  on  the  road  to  liberationP It is  the same  in  Canada  
where  the  workers  of  Ontario  and  British  Columbia  and  the 
 Frenchies   of  northern Ontario  and  New  Brunswick are beginning 
to  turn to  violence. 
The  development of class  consciousness  among all  levels  of work-
ers  in  America  is  still  not  clearly  discernible  because  it  has  not  yet 
reached  the  stage  of  independent   revolutionary  political  organiza-
tion   and because there are many unhealed wounds left by long years 
of racism.  So  far  as  black nationalism is  concerned  far  from  seeing it 
as  an  obstacle to  the  class  struggle   as  do  certain  so-called  orthodox 
52  Pierre  Vallieres 
Marxists (who are more obsessed with scholastic orthodoxy than with 
the  urgent  necessity  of working  practically   under  given  conditions  
for the liberation of the working class),  I see it as one of the most pos-
itive and progressive manifestations of the development of the Amer-
ican  revolution.  For  that  revolution  will  have  to  take  into  account 
not only the  proletarian   aspect  of the worker   but also  his  culture  
his  ethnic origin  his  traditions and customs   his  particular needs and 
tastes;  otherwise  it  will  not  be  a  human  revolution   total  and  liber-
ating. 
Black  nationalism-like  French-Canadian  separatism-is  of  ines-
timable  service  to  revolutionaries  in  that  it  forces  them  to  envisage 
the liberation of the whole  man  and enables  them  to  avoid  the trap 
of half-revolutions which   as  soon  as  they are victorious   change into 
the  oppression  of  racial   linguistic   religious   or  other  minorities. 
Black  nationalism  and Quebec separatism  are again  teaching people 
how much  is  demanded by a true  respect for  men in  the equality of 
natural  and  historical  differences  (and  not  of  differences  in  power 
and  privilege  created  by the  unequal  division  of  wealth   by  private 
ownership of the means of production   by free  competition  the con-
centration of capital in the hands of the fiercest  exploiters and the di-
vision  of  society  into  antagonistic  classes).  This  respect  of  man  for 
man  presupposes  the abolition  of  social  classes   of capitalism   of the 
exploitation of man by man.  And the nationalism of the poor   the ex-
ploited-in contrast to the nationalism  of the steel and oil kings   the 
proprietors  of  nuclear  energy  and  atomic  bombs   the  warmongers 
and  the  manufacturers  of  Agena  rockets-aims  to  crush  no  one. 
Since they are already the ones who are most oppressed  the poor can 
only dominate  themselves   that is  to  say   become their own  masters. 
Their enemies cannot be the   dirty niggers   because  they are those 
dirty niggers;  they cannot be the   French Pea  Soups   because  they 
are  those  French  Pea  Soups;  they  cannot  be  the   damned  ignorant 
factory hands  because they are those ignorant factory hands.  These 
niggers-who  do  not  all  have  the  same  color  skin   who  do  not  all 
speak  the  same  language   who  believe  in  different  prophets   live  in 
ghettos  that  are  foreign  to  each  other  and  experience  in  different 
ways the dictatorship of the same economic   political  and social sys-
tem-all these  niggers  whom  the  partisans  of  slavery   the  business-
men   and  the  politicians  have  for  centuries  contrived  to  set  against 
The  White  Niggers  of America  53 
each  other  (the  better  to  exploit  them  and  keep  them  powerless), 
know  today  that  in  this  world  of  money   violence   and  oppression  
freedom  and peace can be won only by the strength of numbers and 
of arms.  They already have  the numbers.  The arms will  come in due 
time  .  .  .  on the day when  they are sufficiently united to constitute 
the invincible  army of their own liberation and the liberation of  the 
millions  of men  on  the  five  continents who  are  now  enslaved  to  the 
interests of the  free world  For the niggers of America are one with 
the  niggers  of  the  entire  world.  One  with  them  in  servitude.  One 
with  them  in  the  struggle  for  liberation.  One  with  them   when  the 
time  comes   in  the final  assault  on  imperialism  and  in  the definitive 
victory of the human over the inhuman.  One with  them in  the revo-
lution  of man and by man   in  the grand  event  that will  sweep away 
all  the  decay  of the old system  and prepare all  humanity   that is   all 
men   to begin a  new history   without  masters  or slaves   without war 
or  racism   without banks  or thieves. 
3 
 But  how  can  we   the  niggers   who  are  the  ones  most  deprived 
(materially   intellectually   technically)  of  the  means  of  conquering 
power  and  keeping  it   how  can  we  hope  to  overcome  the  greatest 
economic   political   and  military  power in  the world   overthrow im-
perialism   and  found  a  new  society  on  a  completely  different  basis 
from  that  of  the  present  society   we  who  possess  nothing  and  who 
find  it hard to understand the workings of the oppression that makes 
us  slaves?" 
Every nigger   every worker who becomes aware of the intolerable 
injustice  of  the  present  system   every  slave   in  short   who  educates 
himself and  opens  his  eyes  to  the  truth-which it is  the  function  of 
propaganda   religion   and  education  to  hide  from  him  as  much  as 
possible-asks himself with anguish and skepticism the famous  ques-
tion:  HOW? 
A man accustomed to humiliation and forced labor (labor in order 
to  subsist)  becomes fatalistic   passive   skeptical.  He is  tempted to say 
to  himself:   All  those  dreams  only make  us  even more  unhappy and 
don t change anything.  And then   isn t it in the  order  of things that 
there should be some people more intelligent than others   more hard 
54  Pierre  Vallieres 
working   more  thrifty   less  given  to  drink   less  lazy   who  succeed 
more  easily  because  they  are  more   capable,'  soberer   better  edu-
cated  .  .  .  richer  too   you  have to admit? 
 But  doesn t  someone  become   capable   because  he  is  educated? 
And that education that he got  at the university   didn t he pay a  lot 
for  it?  Where  did  he  get  the  money?  Where  did  his  father  get  the 
money? How does it happen that his father has a higher income than 
the average person?  How did he  get  to be a  doctor or an industrial-
ist? Where did his  father s  father get the money to have his son edu-
cated?  And  where  did  his  father s  father s  father    
 And then  why couldn t my father have me educated   send me to 
the  university?  Why  have  my father  and  my  father s  father  always 
been so  hard up? And why are the schools in the working-class quar-
ters dirty  ill equipped  damp   as  if they had been built on purpose to 
make you hate studying? (You do better taking lessons from the gang-
sters   you  know.  And  it  pays  off  fast   tool  But  I d  be  afraid  of 
that     ) And why are workers  wages so  low   and the cost of living 
so  high   that  at  fourteen  or  sixteen  you  have  to  look  for  work  like 
your  father   sell  your  labor by the hour or  the week  and  accept the 
hardest job like  a  gift  from  Heaven because it brings  in  a  few  bucks 
-which you will immediately spend at the clothing store   the corner 
grocery  the movies  the doctor s    and at the tavern when  at the 
end of six  months of this dog s life   you  go  there to drown the dreams 
of your youth in beer and noise?  Can you explain to me   dear doctor  
how  it  is  that  there  are  so  many  taverns  in  Montreal  and  so  many 
drunkards inside? Can you explain to me why you meet mostly work-
ers  there    ignorant   men  and the  unemployed?  And  why  there  are 
more  of these  taverns  in  the  French  East than  in  the  English  West? 
 There  must  be  an  explanation  for  all  that,''  Joe  says  to  himself 
over  and  over.   It s not  possible  that all  of us  from  the  East  End of 
the  city   and  from  Saint-Henri  and  the  Pointe  Saint-Charles   are 
mentally  retarded.  And  that all  of those  damn  rich  men  from  West-
mount   Outremont   and  Mount  Royal  are  more  intelligent  than the 
rest of us.  Here  take my boss for example: he doesn t even know that 
Cartier  made  political  deals  for  the  railroad  companies.  He  doesn t 
know the first  thing about the history of his  country  and he believes 
in  fairy  tales.  The other day  he  said  to  me  in  all  seriousness  that his 
The  White Niggers  of America  55 
father  knew  Ringuet  well    the  author  of  Maria  Chapdelaine,'  says 
he!    How can those damn fools  get rich  so  fast  while  I   who am still 
taking  courses  at  night  and am  interested  in  everything that s  going 
on  and  everything  that s  being  written   I m  still  paying  back  my 
debts?  In the middle  of the twentieth  century   my  wife  has  to  go  to 
work  as  a  cleaning  woman  to  pay  for  the  schooling  of  my  oldest  
who s at the college   and I m not even sure I  can send him back next 
year. And while the rest of us are busting our guts  those bastards tell 
us  to get an education!  (Of course there s Arthur   my brother-in-law  
who s a contractor-he has money and no education. But he makes it 
off patronage   damn him   he steals  from  his  own people.)  I m sick of 
hearing them  preach  to  us.  If this  goes  on   r m  going  to  send one of 
those  bourgeois  to  the  next  world.  If I  haven t  done  it  already   you 
see   it s because  I m  not sure it would help much.  A lot  of us  would 
have  to  get  together  and  settle  their  account  once  for  all   all  that 
gang of damn heartless exploiters   of  .  .  .  There s enough dynamite 
in  Quebec  to  blow  them  all  up  at  the  same  time.  But  the  men  are 
afraid.  When I  get worked up at a union meeting   the president cuts 
me  short   because he doesn t  want the  men  to do  something foolish  
he  says.  And  the  men  fall  for  it   because  monsieur  le  president  is  a 
great friend  of the business agent!  The business agent  he s a lawyer. 
He knows  a lot  about the law  but he doesn t know  much  about life. 
He s not one of us.  He doesn t understand what you say to him.  And 
then he  complicates  everything  with his  Labor  Code  that  you  can t 
understand a word of    But things are going to change  I m telling 
you.  Take a worker s word for it!  At the next elections we re going to 
kick  all  the  old  ladies  off  our  Executive.  We re  going  to  take  our 
affairs  in hand.  And then to hell with  the regulations on this  and the 
regulations  on  that.  The  sparks  are  going  to  fly!  We re  fed  up  with 
having  the bosses  and the union treat us  like  children.  From now on 
either  they listen  to us  or  we  smash  their faces  for  them.  I  hope  the 
men will stick together.  It s damn well time we took our responsibili-
ties  and stopped making our revolutions  in taverns  and started mak-
ing  them  in  our  factories.  I  can t  wait  for  the  day  when  one  of our 
• Maria  Chapdelaine  is  a  well-known  novel  written  in  1913  by  Louis  Hernon.  It 
deals with the life of the Habitants around the tum of the century. Ringuet is  the pen 
name  of  Philippe  Panneton   the  author  of  another  novel  on  the  same  theme  but  set 
during the Depression.  (Trans.) 
56  Pierre  Vallieres 
boys   a longshoreman  say  .  .  .  or a lumberjack  yes   a lumberjack  a 
big  strapping  fellow   stands  up  in  front  of us   thousands  of workers 
assembled  in  Lafontaine  Park   and strikes  up the Marseillaise  or the 
Chant des  partisans-because we  don t have  any  songs  like  that yet 
in  these  parts-and then  this  lumberjack  shouts  to  us:   Aux  armes  
Quebecois!' And  all  together   like  one  man   we  repeat:   Aux armes  
Quebecois!' And  then we get out our rifles  and grenades and decide 
to  make  an  end  of    But  that  great  day   it  won t  be  tomorrow. 
We ll have to  rouse  the men.  If we can get rid of the moss-backs and 
the ass-lickers   that will help.  Those idiots are worse  than the bosses. 
By the way   you know the little newspaper La Cognee?  I don t know 
who  writes  it   but  they re  right  on  target!  Read  it.  If I  could  write  
that s the way I d do it.  They re just right when they say the bigshots 
in the  union are rotten.  But we re going to change that   and no later 
than  this  year   whether  they  like  it  or  not.  We re  sick  of being spat 
on.  I  for  one   anyway   I ve  made  up  my  mind.  Nothing  is  going  to 
stop me.  If the men can act like  men       
It is  through  such  reflections   based  on  a  daily  experience  of  ex-
ploitation   that  every  conscious  worker  reaches  the  conclusion  that 
the heart  of the  problem  is  not  the  alleged   capacity   of  some  (the 
few)  and the incapacity of others; that it is not a question of  compe-
tence   much  less  intelligence   but basically  a  question  of privileges 
unequally  divided   of powers  unjustly  acquired  through  centuries of 
violence  during  which  the  weaker  have  always  been  pitilessly 
crushed by the  stronger  (stronger because  richer). 
4 
The  heart of  the  problem  is  neither  metaphysical  nor  moral.  It is 
material;  it  is  at  the  same  time  economic   historical   and  military. 
Consequently its solution must be of the same nature.  Since the evo-
lution of humanity is  not a philosophical system   there is  no  theoreti-
cal solution to the problems that it raises.  There are only practical so-
lutions. 
Theory  is  an  instrument of research  whose  usefulness  is  measured 
by the  practical actions it enables us  to perform.  A theory is  progres-
sive  and  revolutionary  insofar  as  it  enables  men  to  perform  acts 
which  transform  their  world  by  radically  changing  their  social rela-
tionships. 
The  White Niggers  of America  57 
That is  why every worker who comes to  realize the injustice of his 
condition   the condition of his  fellows   and consequently of the vast 
majority  of  men   is  immediately  confronted  with  the  most  gigantic 
practical problem that has ever presented itself   first  to  men   then to 
collectivities:  How  to  transform  thousands of years of exploitation of 
man  by  man  and  of  incessant  murderous  wars   how  to  transform 
centuries  of accumulation  of  capital  and  concentration  of wealth  at 
the  expense  of  men s  progress  and  freedom   how  to  transform  this 
long  history  of  massacre   pillage   and  slavery  into  a  new  history  of 
peace   justice   and  freedom?  How  to  transform  a  world  dominated 
and perverted by money   hatred   and violence  into a  world  without 
money   hatred   or  violence?  How  to  make  a world  without  niggers? 
How  .  .  .  ? It is  not a theoretical problem but a practical one  be-
cause  it  is  solely a problem  of the  relationship of forces.  It is  a ques-
tion  of  overturning the  present  relationship  of forces;  of seeing to  it 
that the weak-the vast majority of the two billion inhabitants of the 
planet  whose  numbers give  them  a natural   inalienable  right to con-
trol their own affairs-become the stronger   the sole  masters of their 
fate   the  sole  artisans  of their social  universe;  of seeing to  it that the 
powerful-the  small  minority  who  make  up  the  international  busi-
ness bourgeoisie  and who  monopolize  economic   political  and social 
affairs   the  means  of  communication   the  engines  of  war  and  the 
reigning  ideologies-are  reduced  to  impotence   held  in  check   pre-
vented forever  from  exploiting human labor for  their profit. 
It is  a  question  of  making  men  equal   not  only  in  law but in  fact. 
It is  necessary  to  create  the  material  conditions  for  this  equality  
that  is   to  abolish  everything that  makes  the  present  social  relations 
the relations between masters and slaves  sellers and buyers  rich and 
poor  exploiters and exploited.  It is  necessary to  replace all that with 
new social  relations which  are no  longer based on force   money   and 
systematic injustice  but on all men s right to equality  on justice  fra-
ternity   and  the  collective  enjoyment  of  the  wealth   both  material 
and cultural   that belongs to every man  from  birth. 
Humanity  like everything that is natural  can find  within itself the 
 self-regulators  necessary to its survival and progress  without need-
ing  a  class  of  businessmen  to  act  as  policemen.  Perhaps   up  until 
now   humanity  needed  to  be  run  by  a  minority  class  of   entrepre-
neurs   (in  the broad  sense).  But  today  every  man  is  in  a  position  to 
58  Pierre  Vallieres 
become his  own entrepreneur  because  science and technology have 
already  reached  a  sufficient  level  of  development  to  enable  all  the 
collectivities  on  earth-and through  them   all  men-to acquire  the 
material and intellectual means of achieving freedom   social equality  
and the happiness  of working  through  personal  and  collective  crea-
tion  for  the progress  of humanity. 
Only  the  usurpation  by  the  international  business  bourgeoisie 
(businessmen   manufacturers  of  automobiles  and  rockets   warmon-
gers)  of  the  instruments  of  research   the  industries   the  discoveries  
the  universities   the  means  of  disseminating  knowledge   etc.--only 
this  usurpation  by  a  handful  of financiers  and  their  army  of techni-
cians   scientists   and intellectuals prevents humanity today from  tak-
ing  the  most  gigantic  step  in  all  its  history   from  making  the  most 
profound and human revolution the earth has  ever known.  Only this 
class of businessmen   to whom must be added the bureaucrats of So-
viet  and  East  European  state  capitalism   prevents  humanity  from 
coming  out of its long prehistory. 
The point of departure of all revolutions has been that a broad fac-
tion  of a  given  population  has  recognized  the conservative  and par-
asitic  nature of the dominant class   which enjoys  everything without 
doing anything   without producing   while the  majority is  reduced to 
servile obedience to the dictates of the guardians of Order. The great 
revolution  for  which  humanity  is  ripe  will  really  get  under  way  on 
the  day  when  the  workers   scientists   technicians   and  intellectuals 
meet in joint opposition to the gold-plated obscurantism of the bank-
ers and monarchs of the universe. In this century more than one rev-
olution   civil  war   insurrection   riot   general  strike   and  war  of  na-
tional  liberation has  demonstrated the  will  of  the peasants   workers  
and youth of the entire world to transform this world  pillaged by the 
international race for profits  into a world of peace  social justice  and 
fraternity.  But  too  few  scientists   technicians   and  intellectuals have 
as yet come to understand that their discoveries and labor will always 
be  subjugated  to  the  class  interests  of  the  great  financiers  (to  their 
wars   to  their  exploitation  of  the  labor  of  hundreds  of  millions  of 
men  and to the systematic development of underdevelopment in the 
majority of the countries of the  third world") until the day when  in-
stead of assisting the capitalists in their enterprise of dehumanization 
 made in  U.S.A.,"  they turn toward those whose toil   over the centu-
The  White  Niggers  of America  59 
ries   is  precisely what has  enabled them to  make  discoveries  that are 
the pride of the twentieth century  and who   for  their part  are ready 
to join together to build a world commensurate with the imagination 
of the  scientists. 
Unless  they  renounce  all  dignity   unless  they  cynically  flee  from 
their tremendous social responsibility  the scientists  technicians  and 
intellectuals of the twentieth century must consent to become politi-
cized   to  get  their  hands  dirty along  with  the  millions  of   ignorant  
men   the starving   the illiterate   the beggars   the peasants   the unem-
ployed   the little office  clerks   the sales clerks   and the wage-earners  
to whom science has  so  far brought only new and more refined forms 
of oppression  and  alienation. 
The same remark holds  true for  that faction of the petty bourgeoi-
sie   of the middle  class   which  does  not  aspire  to live  in  the orbit   or 
on  the  periphery   of  the great multinational corporations   but which 
wishes to give its existence a meaning more worthy of man. This pro-
gressive part of the petty bourgeoisie must lose  its  illusions about the 
alleged  ability  of  the  system  to put an  end to  injustice  without itself 
disappearing.  You  cannot  abolish  slavery  without  abolishing  the 
power  of the master and  the  relation  of master  to  slave. 
For the progressive petty bourgeois  as for  those scientists  intellec-
tuals   and  technocrats  who have not sold out to the present holders 
of  economic  and  political  power  in  the  world   the  only  choice  that 
makes  sense  objectively is  to  ally  themselves  with  the workers   fann-
ers   students   and all  young people-with the great majority of man-
kind. 
By  allying  themselves   I  mean  that  they  must  take  over  the  pro-
found  aspirations   the  demands   and the economic   political   and so-
cial objectives of the mass of men   not as  enlightened  and paternal-
istic guides of the  ignorant  but as  responsible and conscious auxili-
aries  of  men  and  women  equal  by  rights   to  whom  history  at  last 
offers  the  opportunity  and  the  means  to  organize   in  every  country  
for  their  definitive  liberation  from  oppression   from  their  thousand-
year-old status as  niggers   as  cheap labor  as exploited and humiliated 
beings. 
5 
At first  glance  the problems raised by the evolution of humanity at 
each historical stage always appear insurmountable.  The picture one 
60  Pierre  Vallieres 
paints for  himself   and describes to others  of this society without ex-
ploitation   for  the  achievement  of  which  one  is  ready  to  take  up 
arms   is  like  something out of science  fiction. 
And  in  the  beginning   your  utopia  makes  some  people  pity  you  
others ridicule you   and the majority look upon you as  a kind of mys-
tic without God!  It is  not long before you have acquired a reputation 
for  being  a  dreamer-a fellow  who  is   sincere   but   idealistic   If  
on top  of that   you  intend  to  go  on  to  action   then you  become  ipso 
facto  a  communist  an  anarchist  an irresponsible and dangerous 
man  who   in  the  interest  of  society   should  be locked  up  as  soon  as 
possible in a prison or insane asylum.  As long as  you only preach your 
utopia  the established order is content to take note of your  dissent  
with  contempt  or  indifference.  But  as  soon  as  you  begin  to  act   the 
old  system  hastens  to  turn you into a  public  menace and a  criminal  
so  as  to be able  to bury you  alive  before your  idealism  puts Molo-
tov cocktails   dynamite   and  rifles  into the hands of the  workers and 
the  young  people   who  are  very  receptive  to  the  idea  of  Utopia  
which is all they are waiting for  to rise up en masse against those who 
organize  profit from   and defend oppression.  For no matter what the 
ideologists  of  capitalism   neocapitalism   and  imperialism  may  say 
about  Utopia   it  is  not  a  philosopher s  utopia:  it  sums  up aspirations 
which cry out not only to be perceived and understood  but above all 
to be realized.  Nor  is  Utopia  the  final  point   the  terminus  of human 
evolution.  On the contrary.  It is  only  the point of departure   the be-
ginning   the  first  stage  of  the  new  history  which  men  will  embark 
upon together once they are liberated from  their present condition as 
niggers   as  sub-men. 
The  worker  or  petty bourgeois  who  has  one  day confronted him-
self  and  become  personally  implicated  in  the  unprecedented  chal-
lenge which the liberation of hundreds of millions of men on the five 
continents represents  cannot help feeling that he is  a visionary and a 
madman.  And this is  so  even after the Russian   Chinese   Vietnamese  
and  Cuban  revolutions   for  we  all  know  that  these  revolutions  are 
still  only  first   stumbling  steps.  Much  greater  changes  will  have  to 
occur if human  freedom  is  to become  not just an essence  of the phi-
losophers but an act   if it is  to pass from  being an ideal of the moral-
ists  to  concrete  existence   from  desire  to  practice   if  it  is  to  become 
the individual and  collective  reality  of life. 
The  White  Niggers  of America  61 
6 
The  author  of  this  book  is  an  idealist  who   from  childhood  on  
learned from  his  father  to long for  a  better world  in  which  the  men 
who  work  anonymously from  day to  day-the farmers   workers   day 
laborers  like  my  father-could  enjoy  life  after having  toiled  so  hard 
to  subsist   to  endure  .  .  .  and  to  perpetuate  the  species.  Enjoy  life 
not  by  getting  drunk  on  the  weekend   by   drinking  up  their  pay  
beating their wives and children and destroying themselves in useless 
fits  of anger  but by possessing the material and intellectual means of 
creating  something  in  this  world;  of  giving  of  themselves  to  others 
and of exchanging with them something other than curses   sarcasms  
and humiliations. 
 I wonder when we ll be able to take it easy for  a bit and enjoy life 
without worrying about tomorrow  my father often said.  And with a 
bitterness  mingled  with  resignation   my  mother  would  answer: 
 When  you re  born  for  half  a  loaf   you  can t  expect        My 
mother  was  learning to  forget  all  the  dreams  of happiness  that   like 
all women  she had had in her youth.  And she did not want to discuss 
fantasies  with  my  father.  What  was  the  use?  You  hurt  yourself  by 
hoping.  You  increase your disappointments and life becomes unbear-
able.  Better to  expect  nothing and take  what comes   as  it  comes. 
My  father  would  say  nothing   suppressing  his  hopes  the  way  one 
holds  back  sobs.  I  would  look  into  his  deep   gentle  eyes  and  read  a 
mixture of immense kindness   silent suffering   and perhaps also  grief. 
Sometimes  he  would  smile   just  long  enough  to  tell  me   without 
opening  his  lips   that  his  dreams  could  be  realized   that  one  had  to 
believe  that. 
My  mother  would  complain  about  her headaches   the  dullness  of 
the  radio  broadcasts   the  slovenliness  of  such  and  such  a  neighbor 
.  .  .  while  I   trying  not  to  hear  anything  that  was  going  on  around 
me   would listen to the revolt that mounted inside me and heated my 
blood. 
They say  that silent suffering is  the most  terrible.  (I  read that in  a 
prose poem of Baudelaire s   I  think.)  I  learned very early to  question 
fate in  silence.  Especially on those long rainy days when it seemed to 
me  that  the  whole  universe  had  withdrawn  into  the  depths  of  a 
swamp of misery.  There  men seemed to have given up   abdicated  as 
62  Pierre  Vallieres 
if it was their destiny to go around in circles in the slimy mud of their 
impotence.  Rainy  days  soon  became  unbearable  for  me.  With  eyes 
darkened  by  loneliness  and  hunger   I  would  appeal  to  the  sun.  For 
the sun gave  me back playmates and  made  me forget  my hunger. 
Life very early posed for me the questions that are hard for men to 
answer. It took me many years to begin to find  the elements of an an-
swer  and even more time to discover what had to be done to provide 
a concrete solution   a real solution  to servitude  passivity   alienation  
and poverty. 
My  itinerary  from  working-class  slums  to  the  FLQ  was  long  and 
tortuous.  For  a  workingman s  son   nothing  in  life  is  laid  out  in  ad-
vance.  He has to forge  ahead  to fight  against others and against him-
self   against  his  own  ignorance  and  all  the frustrations  accumulated 
from father to son   he has to surmount both the oppression laid upon 
his  class  by  others  and  his  own  congenital  pessimism   to  give  his 
spontaneous  revolt  a  consciousness   a  reason  and precise  objectives. 
Otherwise   he  remains  a  nigger   he  turns  into  a  delinquent  or  a 
criminal   he consents  to  becoming  at  the  age  of thirty  the  ruin  of a 
man  .  .  .  a  bitter and disenchanted slave. 
The entire experience of workers shows them that the explanation 
for their poverty and impotence lies  in the brutal fact  that there are  
on  the  one  hand   those  who  possess  everything  and   on  the  other  
those who possess nothing. That is  something they all know   they live 
it every day.  But   they say to themselves   what can you do when you 
are one  of those  who  possess  nothing? 
If revolt is  natural to workers  hope is  not. Except in times of crisis 
and revolution  when workers can take advantage of the weakness of 
the system  to deal it a  mortal blow   their long-enforced degradation 
often engenders fatalism   resignation   and even indifference to every-
thing   including  themselves. 
When  a   great darkness   such  as  characterized  the  Duplessis  re-
gime from  1944 to  1959  extends over a whole people   those who ask 
themselves  questions  about man s destiny are  sometimes  tempted to 
despair of others and of themselves.  The triumphant reign of Stupid-
ity seems  to  justify the metaphysics  of the Absurd   of individual An-
archy  and  of  Nausea.  Before  going  through  its   quiet  revolution  
Quebec  went  through  the  dictatorship  of  Stupidity;  and  for  a  long 
The  White Niggers  of America  63 
time the Quebecois struggled vainly   in anxiety and despair  like pen-
niless  prisoners who are totally ignorant of the procedures that cause 
them  to  be  in  prison  one  day  and  in  court  the  next   then  in  prison 
again   without  ever understanding  the  working  of the  machine  that 
shifts them back and forth  in a  universe from  which all light   reason  
and  meaning  are  shut  out   the  universe  called  Justice   Law  and 
Order   the Public Interest.
14 
Under  the reign  of Duplessism   it was  not easy  for  the Quebecois 
to  resist  intoxicating  themselves  by  reading  the  classics  of  despair. 
How  could  one  give  a  meaning  to  this  society  of crushed  and silent 
men?  Not even the best of the oppressed knew how to turn their op-
pression into revolt.  Everywhere there was unanimous silence  a con-
spiracy among all men to remain shut up in their ghettos  to die there 
as  soon  as  possible  and no longer have  to breathe the atmosphere of 
submission  mixed  with  selfishness  in  which  practically no  one  dared 
accept  the  responsibility   beyond  his  own  immediate  interest   of 
working for  the  downfall of Stupidity! 
It was  as  if after the  years  of  struggle  during  the  Depression  and 
the  war   the  Quebecois  had  become  indifferent  to  their  fate.  They 
had  no  resiliency left. 
At  that  time   a  man  who  chose  to  give  his  life  for  an  idea would 
have stirred no emotion among the mass of sluggish men. Winter had 
frozen  the best  minds.  Nothing was  left but day-to-day living   with-
out  a  future   without  passion   without  reason.  Once  in  a  while-
rarely-a revolt  a burst of anger here or there.  But no enduring pas-
sion   no  firm  determination   no  precise  goal.  God  the  Father  gov-
erned in  Quebec  and while  the Quebecois did not really  justify that 
government   they  did  not  seek  to  contest  it  either.  They laughed  at 
it;  and  took advantage of it  under the counter   Political patronage 
provided  social  welfare  for  the  disinherited  and  profits  for  the  new 
rich who  were  manufactured by the regime to compete with  the lib-
eral bourgeoisie. 
It seemed as  if   having  come  through  many years of black misery  
the Quebecois  no  longer attached any importance to  their future   to 
what  they called  their fantasies  of the old  days.  The  only thing they 
looked  forward  to-and they didn t even really believe in that-was 
the American money that Duplessis dangled glittering in front  of the 
64  Pierre  Vallieres 
bishops   deputies   and petty bourgeois;  and   when there was any left 
over  in front of the farmers or workers who promised him their votes 
and complicity in  advance. 
And  yet   a  few  years before   these same  men had often assembled 
to  denounce  the dictatorship  of capital and to  demand  the heads  of 
their exploiters. They had invaded the business quarter and done sig-
nificant  damage  to  the  big buildings  of  the  financiers.  They  had  re-
fused  to go  and fight  to defend the interests of Rockefeller. They had 
hidden  in  the  woods   armed  with  their  rifles.  They had  even  mobi-
lized  their  wives  and  children  to  organize  resistance  to  the  military 
police.  They had been men. 
And  now  here  they  were   applauding  the  demagogy  of  Duplessis 
and  the  vulgarities  of the  drunkard  Camillien  Houde. o  The country 
was becoming a vast circus where if one still wanted to give a mean-
ing to life  one had to have blind faith and commit one s inner self to 
a solitary hope  hard as  the rocks of the Gaspe  black as  the mines of 
Abitibi   dreary  as  the  faces  of  the  workers  of  Montreal  and  cold  as 
the winter of Quebec. 
Few  were  those  who  dared  to  believe.  Nevertheless   during  the 
war men of this country had spoken to other men of this country in a 
language of combat and fraternity.  A language which men like my fa-
ther kept in their hearts  in the hope that one day combat and frater-
nity  would  give  them  the homeland  they  did  not  have.  Yet  in  those 
days  there was  war and hunger. 
At  the  very  time  when  war  seemed  to  be  telling  men  that  they 
were wrong to be bent on living  there were workers in Quebec  as in 
most of the countries of the world   who were longing more than ever 
for  a change  of system. 
Notes 
l.  While  the  Anglo-Americans  numbered  200 000.  In  1760   at  the  time  of 
the  English  conquest   1 500 000  Anglo-Americans  mobilized  their  forces 
against  70 000  French Canadians  dispersed over a vast  territory. 
•  Camillien  Houde was  the  mayor  of Montreal  during the  1940 s  and  early  1950 s. 
(Trans.) 
The  White  Niggers  of America  65 
 .      New  France  sought  to  evolve  a  sounder  economy  than  it had  yet 
known   with  its  sole  reliance  on  the  fur  trade.  Agriculture  was  encour-
aged  .  .  .  but it did not prosper and misery was often widespread. Com-
merce  and  industry  fared  as  badly;  the  fur  trade  passed  through  its  cus-
tomary  cycles  of poverty and plenty;  while  inflation   shipwreck   and  the 
profiteering  of  French  merchants  kept  the  prices  of  imports  high   far 
beyond the means of most of the colonists.  Local industry was alternately 
encouraged and then stamped out when it interfered with French manu-
facturing  interests   under  the  mercantilist  policy  which  prevailed  at 
court;  in  1702  it  was  still  the king  s view  that   The  Colony  of Canada  is 
good only inasmuch as it can be useful to the Kingdom.' Where noncom-
petitive  industries  could  be  established   they  were  encouraged  with  too 
lavish  a  hand   so  that  they  never  became  self-sufficient.  Corruption   the 
shortage  of manpower and  capital   the  difficulties of communication and 
transportation   and  absentee  direction  all  combined  to  prevent  New 
France from  developing a strong and well-rounded  economy   F.  Mason 
Wade  The French Canadians 1760-1945 (New York:  The Macmillan Co., 
1955),  p.  31;  emphasis  added. 
See  also  the  excellent  study  by  Jean  Hamelin   Economie  et societe en 
Nouvelle-France   published by the  Presses  de l Universite  Laval. 
As  can be seen   the idyllic  New  France of Canon Groulx  never existed 
outside  the  imagination  of  the  apostles  of  theocracy  and  obscurantism. 
Moreover   it  is  false  to  picture  our  ancestors  as  Louis  Heberts   profes-
sional  farmers.  Agriculture  was  developed very  belatedly  in  Quebec   es-
pecially  in  the  Eastern  Townships    under  the  English  regime!  The 
French-Canadian  seigneurs  took  no  interest  in  the  development  of  agri-
culture   unlike  the  Anglo-American  colonists   who  quickly  grasped  the 
fact that at this time the development of agriculture was the very founda-
tion  of the  accumulation  of capital   and  who  instituted slavery  precisely 
in order to accelerate and increase this accumulation by the maximum ex-
ploitation of human labor.  That is  why a bourgeoisie rapidly developed in 
the  United  States   while  in  Quebec  the  ruling  class  remained  poor  and 
powerless.  (The rich did not belong to the country and had come only for 
as  long  as  it would  take  them  to amass  money.) 
At  the  time  of the conquest of  1760   more  than  one  French-Canadian 
seigneur viewed the defeat as  a kind of deliverance. These do-nothing no-
bles  would  no  longer  have  to  answer  for  the  country;  they  would  no 
longer  have  to  feel  responsible  for  its  development.  They could  die  qui-
etly  in  idleness   content  with  the  privileges  that  protected  them  from 
work  and insecurity. 
The  dreams  of  Champlain  and  Talon  were  never  realized.  Under  the 
66  Pierre  Vallieres 
French  regime   there existed no  economic base  for  autonomous develop-
ment.  Under  the  English  regime   the  economic  base  (agriculture  and 
commerce)  was  created and placed at the service  of the Anglo-Saxon  in-
terests.  With  the  development  of  banks   canals   railroads   and  industry  
this  economic  base  expanded   but  it  continued  to  serve  English  and 
American interests.  Today   in  the era of the  great  multinational  corpora-
tions   the  economic  base  of  development  is  controlled  and  limited  by 
American imperialism   according to  the needs of the world  market-that 
is   according to the interests of the powerful American business bourgeoi-
sie.  Today imperialism is  working hard to underdevelop the development 
that  already  exists   in  order  to  prevent  the  people  from  building  a  solid 
economic  base  for  the  independence  and  social  revolution  they 
want. 
That is why  in nearly all the countries dominated by imperialism  even 
the  once  powerful   national   bourgeoisies   and  most  of  the  petty bour-
geoisies  are reduced to the role of policemen and lackeys of Yankee inter-
ests. And that is  why  when the necessary revolutions have taken place in 
those  countries   everything will  still have to be built. 
(One of my  future projects will  be to gather the necessary  material for 
an economic history of Quebec.) 
3.  The  nobles  belonged  for  the  most  part  to  the  group  of  privileged   idle 
men  who  formed  the  local  ruling  class  (as  opposed  to  the  French  mer-
chants who  were only   passing through   the  colony).  In  reality   this  rul-
ing class had only  the power to  profit from  the general corruption   while 
the people  who were reduced to the most abject poverty  did not partici-
pate  in  the  government  in  any  way.  The  ruling  class  was  poor  because 
misery was  too widespread for the accumulation of wealth to be the basis 
of the social structure of the time. Apart from  the merchants  the only no-
bles who succeeded were the Jesuits  the Sulpicians  and the priests of the 
Seminary  of  Quebec   who  did  not  have  to  finance  the  numerous  wars 
(against  the  Iroquois  and  the  English).  Besides   ever  since  1659  Bishop 
Laval   who was a Vaticanist and believed in centralization  had been tak-
ing advantage of the absence of civil administration in the colony to make 
the  Church the armature of the  emerging  nation.  The  missionaries  were 
imported not so much to convert the savages as to conquer the country in 
the name of the Church.  Four years  after the arrival of this holy dictator 
and  aristocrat   the  town  of  Quebec  alone  had  150  ecclesiastics  out  of  a 
total  population  of barely 500   or  one  for  every  three  inhabitants!  Even 
today   after  three  centuries   the  power  of  the  Church  is  still  one  of  the 
greatest  obstacles  to  the  development  of  Quebec.  This  was  proved  yet 
again  when  the bishops  undertook  to  torpedo  Bill  60  on  educational  re-
The  White  Niggers  of America  67 
form.  On this  subject see   among others   the  recent  study by Leon Dion 
on  Quebec pressure groups and Bill  60   published  in  the  Cahiers  de  l In-
stitut canadien de  I   education des  adultes   No.  1   1966  and titled  Le Bill 
60 et le  public  
4.  This  whole  period  was  dominated  by  a  serious  commercial  and  agricul-
tural depression that affected both Europe and the colonial empires.  This 
depression  (which  reached  its  depth  in  the  years  1833-1838)  sharpened 
and  precipitated  class  conflicts  in  most  of  the  countries  of  Europe  and 
their overseas colonies.  The French-Canadian rebellion of 1837-1838 was 
thus part of an international movement of revolutions which sowed panic 
among the  ruling classes  of Europe. 
The economic depression of the first  half of the nineteenth century had 
many consequences for  the life of Lower and Upper Canada.  Perhaps the 
most important of these was the massive immigration from  the Irish coun-
tryside   which  was  being laid  waste  by  the  pitiless  industrial  revolution 
presided  over  by  the  capitalists  of  His  Very  British  Majesty.  It is  esti-
mated that between 1838 and 1849 England sent to Canada 428 000 Irish 
poor who had been dispossessed of their goods and independence. During 
this  period  thousands  of  French  Canadians   likewise  dispossessed  of 
everything   emigrated  to  the  United  States.  According  to  contemporary 
historians   twenty  years  after  the  failure  of  the  rebellion  of  1837-1838  
100 000 French  Canadians had left  their country.  And   according to  the 
first  census of the  Province of United  Canada (created from  the union  of 
Quebec  and  Ontario),  in  1851  there  were 60 000  more  English-speaking 
people  in  Canada  than  French  Canadians   out  of a  population  of  about 
two  million.  Shortly  after  Confederation   the  French  Canadians  would 
represent  31.07  percent  of  the  Canadian  population   and  henceforth 
everything would be done to convince them  that they did not form  a na-
tion but a  minority  a  cultural enclave  an  ethnic group  Exceeding 
five  million today  they are still considered by the descendants of the con-
querors  of  1760   and  by  the  Americans  and  most  foreign  observers  who 
deign  to take  an  interest in  this curious people   as  a   remnant  of medi-
eval  society   with  no  power  and  no  future.  Fortunately   the  Quebecois 
have a quite different view of themselves  and they firmly  intend to carry 
out the revolution  that is  ripening in  the cities and in  the countryside  to 
the  great despair  of  those  who  profit  from  the  present  regime  and their 
most  faithful  allies   the politicians and  the clergy. 
5.  Cartier was the only French Canadian  but the cleverest politician  in the 
group  of  Hincks   Galt   Merrit   Watkin   Keefer   and  Andrews   who 
created  the  coast-to-coast  railroad  network  for  which  the  British  North 
America  Act  was  drawn  up.  Already  in  1854-1856 and in  1861-1862 he 
68  Pierre  Vallieres 
had  protected the  interests  of the  Grand  Trunk by a  piece  of legislation 
that  provided  guarantees  and  substantial  loans  for  the  reorganization  of 
the railroads belonging to the most important financial group in the coun-
try.  That is  what the  taxes  wrung from  the  workers  were used for. 
6.   One powerful  force  [in  London]  behind  the  Union  Act  was  that  of  the 
banking firm  of  Baring  Brothers   which  had  underwritten  almost  all  the 
Upper Canadian securities.  .  .  .  One of the principals of this firm   Francis 
T.  Baring   was chancellor of the exchequer in the Melbourne cabinet  and 
the  Baring  interests  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  the  determina-
tion  of  the  cabinet  to  shift  the  burden  of  Upper  Canadian  bankruptcy 
onto  the  shoulders  of  the  prosperous  lower  province   F.  Mason  Wade  
op.  cit.,  p.  225. 
It can be assumed  that the same  phenomenon  occurred again  in  1867  
if  one  considers  that  the  Grand  Trunk  and  Intercolonial  Railway  com-
panies were  controlled by British  interests. 
7.  During the summer of 1944 a number of street fights  took place in  Mont-
real  between French  Canadians and  the military  police.  The  Saint-Jean-
Baptiste  Society  of  Montreal   of  which  Roger  Duhamel  was  president  
publicly condemned violence.   Civilized people should have other meth-
ods for  finding a common ground for  their different viewpoints  he wrote 
in  La Patrie  of June  10   1944. 
In the fall   acts  of violence  multiplied  all  across  Quebec   even  in  Chi-
coutimi  and  Rimouski.  There  was  more  talk  than  ever  about  independ-
ence  and revolution.  The Rue  Saint-Jacques and the  clique of colonels  
were  denounced on  every hand. 
On  November  29   after  a  speech  by Andre  Laurendeau   several  thou-
sand French Canadians paraded through the financial district of Montreal 
breaking  windows  at  the  offices  of  the  National  Selective  Service   the 
 sold-out   newspaper  Le  Canada   the  Bank  of  Montreal   the  Montreal 
Trust Company   and  other Anglo-American  businesses. 
The  riots  spread  and the  English-language newspapers  demanded that 
the  demonstrations be repressed.  Le Devoir   as  was  its  habit    deplored  
the  incidents  in  Montreal   Quebec   Chicoutimi   and  Rimouski. 
An  angry  crowd  broke  windows  at  the  Quebec  residence  of  Louis  St. 
Laurent  then Canadian Minister of Justice. And eminent English Canadi-
ans  recommended  that  machine  guns  be  used  to  force  the   French  Pea 
Soups   to  defend  the interests of the   free world"! 
8.  The  disturbances came  to  a head on August 29  and 30   1917.  Orators ex-
horted  the  crowds  to  clean  their  rifles  and  take  up  a  collection  to  buy 
other arms.  The  police  tried  to  break  up the  meetings:  at  least  one  man 
was  killed.  The  wealthy home  of Hugh  Graham  (Lord  Atholstan),  owner 
The  White  Niggers  of America  69 
of  the  Montreal  Star   was  dynamited.  One  Lalumiere  and  eleven  other 
French-Canadian  workingmen  were  held  responsible for  this  attack  and 
were  accused  of  having  plotted  to  kill  Borden   Senator  Beaubien   and 
other public men  who  supported conscription.  The leaders of the rioters  
Villeneuve   Lafortune   Cote   and  Mongeau   gave  their  entire  support  to 
Lalumiere and his  companions.  They were all  arrested on  September 12  
1917.  Crowds continued to  roam the streets shouting  Borden to the gal-
lows   and   Long live  the  Revolution   and shooting their rifles  into the 
air.  Some  Paris  newspapers  began to  raise  the possibility of Quebec s se-
ceding  from  Canada   while  Bourassa  preached more  sermons  on   sterile 
violence   and  sang  the  praises  of  electoralism  and  dialogue  (from  Bou-
rassa  to  Pelletier   the  tradition  is  maintained!).  Which  did  not  prevent 
violence  from  reigning  from  one  end  of  Quebec  to  the  other   even  in 
Sherbrooke   one  of the  most  conservative  cities in  the country. 
In  March  1918  riots  broke  out  in  Quebec.  Several  thousand  persons 
poured  through  the  city  and  set  fire  to  the  federal  police  station.  The 
crowd went wild and sang the Marseillaise.  They sacked the offices of the 
Chronicle  and  L  Evenement   then  attacked  the  office  of  the  registrar  of 
the  Military  Service  Act  and  burnt  it  to  the  ground  with  all  its  records. 
On  March  30 the  army  fired  on  the  crowd   and  the  next  day  the  entire 
city rose up.  It was  Easter.  On the 1st of April  the crowd in  its tum fired 
on the army from  rooftops  windows  snowbanks-any place that afforded 
cover.  Five soldiers  were wounded and four  civilians  killed.  Hundreds of 
workers  and  young  people  were  wounded  and  some  sixty  others  were 
thrown  in jail.  On April 4 the federal  government decreed  by ministerial 
order   that the rioters should  be immediately drafted   the effect of which 
was  to heighten the rioting instead of lessening it. The disturbances ended 
with  the close  of the  war   but the people s bitterness never ended. 
9.  Trained in the classical colleges of the clergy   where education was based 
exclusively on  the study of the  humanities  these petty bourgeois   stim-
ulated by  the Irish troubles  began to promote a quasi-religious separat-
ism  without an  economic  program.  Duplessis  was  able to  take  advantage 
of  this  to  reinforce  his  power immediately after the war   but once firmly 
established  he  wasted  little  time  supporting  the  nationalists   whom  at 
heart  he  despised.  He  became  God s  gift  to  the  Americans.  In  the  same 
way   Duplessis  took  advantage  of  the  clergy s  admiration  for  Franco  
Hitler   Mussolini   and especially  Salazar  (who had set up in  Portugal the 
corporate  regime  recommended  by the encyclicals)  to  place  the  bishops 
and  cures  at  his  mercy.  Having broken  the  back  of  the  nationalists   the 
liberals   and  the  Communists   Duplessis  built his  power  on  an  alliance 
between  Religion  and  Finance   with  a   pro-autonomy   flavor-in  order 
70  Pierre  Vallieres 
to save face for  the Banana Republic that Quebec had become. His great-
est delight was to provide the bishops with opportunities to come and eat 
out of his hand  .  .  .  when he had concluded good bargains with his Amer-
ican  friends. 
10.  The Grand Inquisitor of the time   Cardinal Villeneuve  was  the chief ar-
chitect  along with  Duplessis  of Quebec anti-Communism   the  French-
Canadian  and Catholic  version  of Senator  McCarthy s witch hunt. 
11.  On the occasion of this conflict the Archbishop of Montreal  Msgr.  Char-
bonneau   declared:   We  want  social  peace   but  we  do  not  want  the 
working class to be crushed. We are more interested in man than in cap-
ital   (Le  Devoir   May      1949.)  Alerted  by  the  Rue  Saint-Jacques  
Duplessis  persuaded  Pope  Pius  XII  to  force  the  resignation  of  Msgr. 
Charbonneau and  exile  him  to  British  Columbia. 
12.  When Charles Gagnon and I went on a hunger strike at the  United Na-
tions   a  group  of  Christians  from  the  University  of  Montreal  demon-
strated their solidarity with us.  One can judge from  the contents of their 
 declaration  of  solidarity   what  a  long  way  social  consciousness  has 
come  in  Quebec   for  believers  as  well  as  nonbelievers.  This  declaration 
has  been  one  of the  greatest  consolations  to  us  during our  detention  in 
New York.  Here are  a  few  extracts  from  it: 
 We  declare  our  solidarity  with  the  hunger  strike  undertaken  by 
Pierre  Vallieres  and  Charles  Gagnon  in  New  York  on  September  26  
1966.  By  this  we  mean  that  we  are  fighting  for  the  liberation  of  the 
workers  of Quebec   and  indeed  against·all  forms  of exploitation  of man 
by  man;  and that we  are trying to promote a more just and fraternal so-
ciety through  socialism.  If Pierre Vallieres  and Charles  Gagnon  thought 
it  necessary  to  use  violence by organizing  the  new  terrorist  network  of 
the FLQ  they did so  advisedly.  One may dispute the realism  and effec-
tiveness of this method of action.  One may also  approve it.  .  .  .  As  one 
may dispute the realism  of a world which  right-thinking  people believe 
to  be  peaceful  when  it  is  steeped  in  the  violence  that  is  done  to  the 
weakest every day  .  .  .  ! 
 We are  united  in  solidarity  with  those  who  are  fighting  against  the 
chief enemy of Man  which at the present time is neocapitalism  .  .  .  and 
imperialism.  .  .  . 
 We are  aware  of  the  fact  that  our  struggle  in  Quebec  is  taking 
place  in  the framework  of  another   much  vaster struggle   that of all  the 
clear-thinking  responsible   and fraternal  men the world over   atheists or 
not  Christians or not   Marxists or not  who are fighting for the liberation 
of Man ....    Le Quartier Latin  October 24   1966;  and Le Devoir   Oc-
tober 25   1966. 
The  White  Niggers  of America  71 
This  statement  was  signed  by  believers  and  nonbelievers   students  
workers   professors   journalists   writers   priests   and so  on. 
13.  A.  The American  blacks:  Increasingly  conscious   they  are  becoming  in-
creasingly  responsible  and  active.  Black  Power   however   is  not  yet  a 
structured  and  ideologically  defined  organization.  It is  a  sort  of  Afro-
American  equivalent  of  Quebec  separatism  and  contains  all  the  same 
shades of thinking.  On the other hand  its immediate objectives are more 
clearly defined.  They can be summed  up as  follows: 
(1)  The first  aim  of Black Power is  to give  the black majorities of cer-
tain  counties   districts  or great urban centers (in  1970  blacks will be in 
the  majority  in  fifty  big  American  cities)  control  over  economic   politi-
cal   and social  affairs-first  of all   the affairs  of the blacks themselves-
by  putting in force  the  rights  which  the  American  Constitution already 
guarantees  to  all  citizens  of the  United  States   including  blacks.  In  the 
beginning   therefore  the struggle is legal   but the blacks are determined 
to  have  all  their  constitutional  rights fully  respected.  And  in  the  North 
of  the  United  States  no  less  than  in  the  South   that  is  enough  to  sow 
panic  among  the  white  ruling  classes   particularly  among  their  richest 
members  who are almost exclusively of British stock.  Nazism and all the 
other forms  of fascism  (Minutemen   John  Birch  Society   Ku  Klux  Klan  
etc.)  are  organizing the  counterattack against  Black  Power. 
( )  That is why the second point of the Black Power program is the or-
ganization of armed self-defense of American black communities and  of 
such governments as  they  may  in  time  establish  over counties   districts  
quarters   cities   and  perhaps  even  states.  The blacks  also  want  to  take 
control  of their  schools   hospitals   playgrounds   etc.,  and  to  defend  this 
control  weapons in hand.  (There is  a striking similarity between this ob-
jective  and  that  of  the  Popular  Liberation  Committees  that  the  FLQ 
wants  to  help organize  in  the cities  and countryside  of Quebec.  See  es-
pecially   Les  Comites  populaires  de  liberation   in  L Avant-Garde   No. 
    February  1966   and  my  pamphlet   Qu est-ce  que  le  FLQ?,"  1st  ed., 
June  1966.)  Armed  self-defense  was  organized  for  the  first  time  by  the 
black  revolutionary  Robert  Williams   who  has  related  his  experience  in 
the  book  Negroes  with  Guns  (New  York:  Marzani  and  Munsell   1962). 
Williams   book   together  with  The  American  Revolution  (New  York: 
Monthly  Review  Press   1963)  by  the  black  worker  and  unionist  James 
Boggs   has appeared in  translation in  the collection  Les Cahiers libres  
of  Franc;;ois  Maspero  under  the title  La Revolution  americaine.  A good 
part of the philosophy of Black Power has been drawn from  the famous 
lectures  of  Malcolm  X  (who  was  assassinated  in  1965).  The  major 
speeches  of Malcolm  X have  been  published  by  Merit  Publishers  (New 
York)  under the  title  Malcolm  X  Speaks. 
72  Pierre  Vallieres 
(3)  In addition  Black Power demands that black leaders democratically 
elected by blacks to defend  the interests of blacks be given  the right  to 
represent  the  twenty  million  Afro-Americans  at the  international level. 
That  means  that  if the  whites  refuse  to  apply  the  majority  rule   which 
they themselves invented  the blacks will simply get along without them. 
And that is  the profound meaning of what is  called  black nationalism  
The  blacks  are  increasingly  refusing  integration   because  integration 
means the suqugation of the black majorities of many counties  districts  
and  cities  in  the  United  States  to  rich   white  minorities.  (Thus   in 
Lowndes  County   Alabama   the  blacks  constitute  nearly  85  percent  of 
the population  and yet in the elections of November 8   1966  there were 
in that county as many whites as blacks who had the right to vote!  That s 
integration.)  Constitutionally  the  blacks  have  the  same  rights  as  the 
whites  but in concrete reality they do not have the same freedoms.  And 
when the rich whites cannot crush the blacks with laws  they assassinate 
them.  Personally   I believe  that in  no  civilized country does  one  find  so 
much violence and hate as  in the United  States.  And this hate-filled vio-
lence comes exclusively from  the powerful American  capitalists. 
Since the violent death of Malcolm X in  1965  the most influential and 
popular leader of the Black Power movement has  been the president of 
SNCC  (Student  Non-Violent  Coordinating  Committee),  Stokely  Carmi-
chael   who  is  only  twenty-five  years  old.  He  has  already  been  in  prison 
several  times   but he has  not yet been assassinated!  Working with poor 
blacks  of  the  rural  South   Harlem   Atlanta   or  Los  Angeles   Carmichael 
has  just launched  a  campaign  against  the drafting  of blacks   whom  the 
Pentagon sends to Vietnam by the thousands to murder innocent people 
and  be murdered in  turn in the diabolical  war engendered by imperial-
ism.  A  great  number  of  American  officials  are  now  demanding  Carmi-
chael s head. 
Biack Power is being organized in a climate of riots  bombings  and as-
sassinations and is  a strong expression of the class  struggle  that is  devel-
oping  in  Uncle  Sam s  country  and  threatening  its  system.  But  while 
Black Power and the Black Panthers-the political party to which it has 
given  birth  in  the  South-are  organizing  the  blacks  against  the  white 
capitalists   their  nationalism  has  a  strong socialist  coloration  and is  in 
increasingly  radical  opposition  to  the  black  bourgeoisie  which   more-
over   has  just  publicly  condemned  Black  Power.  Of  course   there  are 
conflicts  of  interest  within  the  Black  Power  movement   but dominated 
and led  as  it  is  by  the  most  progressive  (and  youngest)  elements  of  the 
black   nation    class   or   community   it  has  every  chance  of  creat-
ing   in  the near future   the conditions for  a revolution of unprecedented 
The  White  Niggers  of America  13 
scope in the United States. For Black Power  which is a very popular mass 
movement   one  which  mobilizes  the  majority  of  the  most  exploited  cit-
izens of North America  is developing a strategy which cannot fail  to radi-
calize  class  struggle  in  the  United  States  and  lead  the  millions  of  poor 
people in this  the richest country in the universe  to rise in revolt. That is 
why  it  is  in  the  interest  of  all  the  other  niggers   all  the  other  exploited 
people   including  the  Quebecois   to  unite  with  the  American  blacks  in 
their struggle for  liberation. 
More  than  one  petty bourgeois  in  the black  organizations  dreads  the 
approaching upheaval   but feeling  it  to  be inevitable   is  forced  either  to 
follow  the movement or to  ally himself with all  the  Martin Luther Kings 
of the black bourgeoisie and of Lyndon B.  Johnson s Democratic Party; in 
short to prostitute himself to the organizers and defenders of colonization 
at  home  and  colonization  of  the  third  world   in  the  name  of   non-
violence"!  Today  it  is  no  longer  Birmingham-that is   the  integration  of 
buses   snack bars   and bowling alleys  (what a  revolution! I)-that symbol-
izes  the fundamental  aspirations of the twenty million black workers and 
young  people   but Watts that is   armed violence   the  disappearance  of 
the slums and ghettos  the occupation of factories by the workers   and so 
forth. 
The black  organizations  that feel  most  responsible  for  their class  are 
CORE  (Congress  of  Racial  Equality)  and  SNCC.  These  organizations  
which were originally  nonviolent  are becoming increasingly conscious 
of what is required to liberate the blacks and are learning in daily struggle 
with the workers that it will be necessary to employ energetic and  conse-
quently   illegal  means  to transform  not only the unbearable condition of 
the  blacks  but the  whole  of American  society   which  is  completely per-
verted by capitalism and its terrible social.consequences:  racism  poverty  
unemployment   crime   delinquency   etc.  With fire  and sword   the blacks 
are regenerating North America and giving back to  man what belongs to 
man by wrenching it from  the grasp of the businessmen  the Johnsons  the 
McNamaras   and the  Kennedys  (Bobby   Ted   John  F.,  and Co.). 
As for the  white  organizations   those  that are  most  aware and most 
concretely  committed  understood  from  the  beginning  that  Black  Power 
and   black  nationalism   being  fundamentally  and  spontaneously  anti-
capitalist   were  therefore  not   racist   They  saw  at once  that the blacks 
were not hostile  to cooperation on  a basis  of absolute equality but to  the 
white  paternalism  that  constantly  humiliated  them-the paternalism  of 
the Marxists as well as the liberals. The blacks loathe that sort of paternal-
ism   and rightly so   but they willingly agree to cooperate with the revolu-
tionary whites  in particular Youth Against War and Fascism   the DuBois 
7  4  Pierre  Vallieres 
Clubs  (a  mixed  organization  that includes both whites  and  blacks but is 
predominantly white),  Students for a Democratic Society   the Progressive 
Labor Party   and  the Young  Socialist  Alliance.  All  of these organizations 
are  young   dynamic   open   and  in  ideological  agreement  with  Marxism. 
They  differ  among  themselves  only  as  to  means  of  action.  Apart  from 
Youth  Against  War and  Fascism  and Students for  a  Democratic  Society  
their  members  still  take  refuge  too  often  in  the  clear  conscience  that 
comes  from  giving  the  blacks   moral   support.  But  they  are  all  in  the 
process  of  becoming  radicalized  and  their  agitation   like  their  propa-
ganda   has  increasing  influence  in  the  cities  of  the  North  and  the  poor 
rural areas of the South. 
The   white   publications  which  support  and  even  contribute  to  the 
development of Black  Power  are as  follows: 
(a)  Monthly  Review (of international reputation) which   together with 
the  French review Partisans              Maspero),  contributes  the  most  to 
the  renewal  of  revolutionary  thought  and  to  the  historical   dialectical 
analysis of the development of the class struggle throughout the world.  By 
their  profound  economic  analyses   Baran   Sweezy   Huberman   Gunder 
Frank   and  the  others  are  successfully  carrying  on  the  work  undertaken 
more than a century ago by Marx and Engels. Together with the Partisans 
group   they are certainly the intellectuals of the capitalist world who  are 
closest to the revolutionaries of the entire world   the most  useful to them 
on  the level of revolutionary ideology  and strategy and  the  most listened 
to and respected by the movements struggling against oppression.  (b)  The 
Partisan   published by Youth Against War and           a review more ac-
cessible to the masses  and  like Monthly Review  open to the problems of 
revolutionary  movements.  the  world  over.  (c)  The  Young  Socialist   pub-
lished  monthly by the group of the same name.  (d)  Challenge   the  news-
paper of the  Progressive  Labor  Party   published  in  English  and  Spanish 
(for  the  Puerto Ricans  and  Dominicans  in exile   in  New York). 
B.  The Puerto Ricans and the Mexicans: The Puerto Ricans of New York  
of whom  there are at least a million and whose numbers are growing very 
rapidly   constitute an increasingly dangerous mass for  the capital of  free 
enterprise   where  everything  is  the   greatest  in  the  world   Unemploy-
ment   slums   disease   and  ignorance bring them  together  with  the  blacks 
in  the same struggle for  liberation. Besides  the majority of them live near 
Harlem   and as  nearly all  the Puerto Ricans are brown or black   they are 
coming more and more to form  a single community with the Afro-Ameri-
cans-especially since  they share the same living conditions as  their Har-
lem brothers.  (A fact to be underlined:  in the Manhattan House of Deten-
tion   one  of the biggest  prisons in  the state of  New York   where  Charles 
The  White  Niggers  of America  75 
Gagnon and  I have been held since  September 28   a minimum of 80 per-
cent of the prisoners are black or Puerto Rican.  The remaining 20 percent 
are  chiefly  Greeks   Italians   Jews   Poles   et al.,  in  short   white  niggers  
The  subordinate  prison  personnel  are  in  great  majority  black   while  the 
superior officers-captains and so  on-are almost  exclusively  white.  Per-
sonally   since  I  have  been here  I  have  seen  only  one  black  captain    
and  God knows we see  enough  captains!  They are  the only   visitors  we 
have  inside  the  cell  blocks.) 
The Puerto Ricans   to whom should be added a few thousand Domini-
cans   Haitians   Japanese   et al.,  who  live  in  the  same district   have a few 
newspapers  and  magazines  of their  own.  But  unfortunately   these  news-
papers and  magazines  are quite conservative   although  not so  much so  as 
the  Yankee  publications.  There are  a  few  small  groups of revolutionaries 
(made  up  chiefly  of  refugees  from  Santo  Domingo),  but  as  yet  nothing 
comparable  to  the  black  organizations.  At  first  glance   it  seems  that  the 
Puerto  Ricans  lack  the   rediscovered  pride   and  determination  which 
animate  the struggle  of the blacks.  They  seem  more  completely crushed  
more  disoriented.  Many  thousands of them  do  not  speak a  word  of Eng-
lish   unlike  the  blacks   who  all  speak  English.  Consequently   they  are 
more withdrawn into themselves and more vulnerable to the despotic  na-
ture  of  the  system.  The  prisons  of  New  York  are  filled  with  innocent 
Puerto  Ricans  who  have  no  means of defense.  The blacks   in  general   do 
better;  not  because  they  are  more  intelligent   but  because  despite  the 
centuries of slavery their community is  better equipped  because they are 
more  numerous   and  because  they  have  rediscovered  their  collective 
pride.  They have a class  consciousness  which  the Puerto Ricans have  not 
yet  sufficiently developed.  But the struggle for  independence and revolu-
tion going on in Puerto Rico makes them more aware every day   and their 
anti-imperialism is becoming more violent.  A number of black and white 
organizations  are  presently  contributing  to  the  awakening  of  a  Puerto 
Rican  class  consciousness  that  later  will  spontaneously  integrate  itself 
with  a  broader  class  consciousness   a  class  consciousness  that  is  interna-
tional  and multiracial. 
As  for  the  Mexican-Americans  of  Texas  and  California   they  are  or-
ganized  in  agricultural  workers   unions.  In  1966  their  demands  took  on 
unprecedented scope.  Forming a population  of  a few  million disinherited 
workers   stripped  of  everything   underpaid  and  enslaved  to  seasonal 
labor  they have begun to invade the luxurious cities of the  new rich   by 
the  thousands.  A  number  of strikes  and  demonstrations   directed  jointly 
by union leaders and priests  have been repressed by the  Western-style  
reigning Order   which did not hesitate to have  Kennedy assassinated and 
76  Pierre  Vallieres 
which  is  the  brains  and  heart  of  the  white   millionaire   extreme  Right. 
The   Kennedy   men   who  are  not  very  firmly  established  in  this  region  
are  trying to  take  advantage  of the  discontent  of  the  Mexican-American 
 poor  who  are beginning to imitate the black  poor  It is  possible  that 
the  Mexican-Americans  will  continue  to  be deceived by  the  Democratic 
Party   because  their  struggle  is  only  beginning  and  an  ideology  corre-
sponding  to  their  true  interests  does  not  seem  to  have  been  formulated 
yet.  It is  possible  that  they  will  be fooled  by a  Martin  Luther  King or a 
Bobby  Kennedy  (who  is  only  a  fascist  disguised  as  a  liberal  and  who  is 
taking advantage  of his  brother s   canonization  by capitalist  opinion  to 
attempt  to  succeed  him).  But the  recent and current history  of the  de-
colonization of the American black   (that is  the title of a book by Daniel 
Guerin   published by Editions de Minuit   Paris),  demonstrates that all the 
Martin  Luther  Kings  that  capitalism  can  manufacture   now  and  in  the 
future   are-like the system itself-not strong enough to resist  the will of 
the  majority  of men   to  resist  their vital  need for  concrete freedom.  The 
Mexicans of Texas and California will also finally come to understand that 
this  freedom  is  not to  be found  by marking an X on  a ballot. 
C.  The   white niggers":  Although  their unions  are rotten  to the core  
although most of their parties-including the Communist Party-are con-
servative  and  accept  the  rules  of  the  democratic  (i.e.,  legal)  game   the 
workers   students   intellectuals  and youth of the  United States are begin-
ning  to  recognize  the  true  nature  of  the  system   its  arbitrary  character  
which  is  called  freedom  of the  individual.  (Which  individuals?  The rich  
of course   those who  can  buy  anything they want   even the right to kill 
the weak   to jail them   exploit them   etc.;  those  who  regularly spend mil-
lions  to  get  themselves  elected  so  as  to  be  able  to   democratically   im-
pose on  the people laws  which will  enable  them  to make  even  more  mil-
lions   and to manufacture wars-in Vietnam   the Congo   Santo Domingo 
etc.-in order to make billions out of the oppression they give themselves 
the right to exercise over three-quarters of humanity  .  .  .  in  the name of 
the  Rights  of Man   the  United Nations   world  peace   the great  Kennedy  
Saint Paul VI   God the Father  and General Motors!) The war in Vietnam  
the  bloody  repression  of  the  Dominican  revolution   the  intervention  of 
the CIA in Indonesia  in  Algeria  and in Brazil in  1965   the struggle of the 
blacks   the  growing  number  of  spontaneous  strikes   the  widespread  and 
growing  unemployment   poverty   delinquency   etc.,  the increasingly  fre-
quent intervention of the  State Department in  the private lives  of mem-
bers of the opposition   the rising cost of living   etc.,  are turning the white 
 American  Way of Life   into  a  veritable hell.  Revolt  is  rumbling among 
the whites.  Housewives boycott the supermarkets;  union members go  out 
The  White  Niggers  of America  77 
on  wildcat  strikes;  young  people  ally  themselves  with  the  blacks  against 
the  Southern  and  Northern racists   publicly tear up their draft  cards and 
other symbols of American imperialism  burn Johnson in effigy and choose 
to  go  to  jail  rather  than  murder  innocent  Vietnamese.  The  unemployed 
and  the  poor  whites   say  thirty  million  Americans   are  still  unorganized. 
But  out of the  present  social  agitation  there  should  arise  a  revolutionary 
organization  capable  of  reaching  this  mass  which  now  has  no  voice  or 
power but which   if it rose  up united with the blacks  Puerto Ricans   and 
Mexican-Americans  would soon rid humanity of its worst enemies. Let us 
hope that the  New Left  in America will  soon  recognize  the urgency of 
building a  revolutionary organization  and  will  devote less  energy to pub-
lishing seventy-five  newspapers that have  undeniable value  .  .  .  but not 
the  value  of a  people  in  arms.  (It  is  interesting  to  note  that  most  of the 
leaders  of  the  progressive   white   movements  are  of non-British  origin; 
they are the descendants of the generations of immigrants from  whom the 
big bourgeoisie   which is  of British stock   has drawn its wealth by exploit-
ing  their labor to the maximum and by rigorously applying the social phi-
losophy of Adam Smith: give the worker a subsistence  that is   just enough 
to enable him  to go  on producing surplus value as long as possible for  the 
profit  of the  Wall  Street  birds of  prey.) 
To that Left which is accustomed to orderly offices and  anti-revision-
ist   conventions   the  day  when  the  whites  will  take  up  arms   join  with 
blacks and other minorities   and march on Washington seems  far  off.  But 
personally   I  believe  that  the  American  working  class  is  ripe  for  revolu-
tion.  Although   like  every  working  class  in  the  world   it  is  poor  in  re-
sources  and  weak  in  hope   it  lacks  neither  courage  nor  ingenuity.  But 
since  the  Left  neglects  its  responsibilities  and  is  still  content  to  wait   it 
may be up to the black revolutionaries to give the  white niggers  the op-
portunity  and  the  means  of  making  the  revolution   notwithstanding  all 
the  difficulties  presented  by  such  an  undertaking  in  a  society  contami-
nated by racism.  But the economic interests of the workers  whatever the 
color of their skin   always win out in the end  overcoming both racism and 
religious  prejudice.  The poor economic health of the American  people in 
this last third of the twentieth century leads me to believe that the Ameri-
can  revolution  is  already on  the  march. 
14.  To  be convinced  of this   one  need only  read or reread the Quebecois lit-
erature  of the  1950 s. 